
The Commonwealth of Australia 



FEDERAL 
HANDBOOK 

PREPARED IN CONNECTION WITH THE 
EIGHTY-FOURTH MEETING 

OF 

THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION 

FOR THE 

ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE 



HELD IN AUSTRALIA, 

AUGUST, 1914. 



COMPILED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE 
FEDERAL COUNCIL OF THE ASSOCIATION 



EDITED BY 
G. H. KNIBBS, C.M.G., F.R.A.S., F.S.S. 

:: :: AND PUBLISHED BY THE :: 

COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT 



By Aulhority ; Albert J. MuIIelt. Government Printer, Mtlbourne. 



wt^-= 



-^■11 



PREFACE. 



This Handbook, specially prepared for the use of member's of the British 
Association for the Advancement of Science, at the Australian Meeting of 
1914, contains a series of articles written by persons selected for that 
purpose by the Federal Council in Australia. These articles set forth 
matters which, it is believed, will be found of interest, and the data of 
which are in most cases not readily accessible to general readers abroad, 
nor even to those in Australia. Much of the material also has not hitherto 
been published. 

The issue of the Handbook has been made possible by the generosity of 
the Federal Government of Australia in undertaking to defray the expense 
of publication. That Government also has very kindly placed all desired 
official sources of information in its possession at the disposal of the 
Editor. 

The articles were decided upon by the Federal Council in Australia of 
the British Association for the Advancement of Science, in whose name the 
invitation was made to each of the writers to contribute. Each author is 
alone responsible for all statements made or opinions expressed in his 
article. 

The closing chapter refers to miscellaneous matters worthy of mention 
which were not coveied by the pi'eceding chapters. 



Editor. 



Melbourne, March, 1914. 



;:(Jivr57 



coisrTEisrTS. 



PAGE 

Chapter I. — History of Australia . . . . . . . . i 

By Ernest Scott, Professor of History ia the University of Melbourne. 
Chapter II. — The Aboriginals of Australia . . . . . . . . 33 

By W. Baldwin Spencer, C.M.G., M.A., F.R.S., Professor of Biology in 
the University of Melbourne. 

Chapter III. — -The Physical and General Geography of Australia . . 86 

By Griffith Taylor, B.Sc, B.E., B.A., F.G.S., Physiographer in the Com- 
monwealth Bureau of Meteorology. 

Chapter IV. — Climate of Australia .. .. .. .. ..122 

By H. A. Hunt, F.R.Met.S., Commonwealth Meteorologist. 

Chapter V.^Australian Vegetation . . . . . . . . . . 163 

By J. H. Maiden, F.L.S., Government Botanist, New South Wales. 

Chapter VI. — The Animal Life of Australia . . . . . . . . 210 

By W. A. Haswell, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S., Professor of Biology in the 
University of Sydney. 

Chapter VII. — -The Geology of the Commonwealth . . . . . , 241 

By T. W. Edgeworth DA^^D, C.M.G., D.Sc., F.R.S., Professor of Geology 
in the University of Sydney ; E. W. Skeats, D.Sc, A.R.C.S., F.G.S., 
Professor of Geology in the University of Melbourne ; T. S. Hall, M.A., 
D.Sc, Lecturer in Biology in the Univei-sity of Melbourne ; W. S. Dun, 
Lecturer in Palaeontology in the Universitj- of Sydney ; and F. Chap- 
man, A.L.S., Palaeontologist to the National Museum, Melbourne . 

Chapter VIII. — -Astronomy and Geodesy In Australia . . . . . . 326 

By PiETRO Baracchi, F.R.A.S., Government Astronomer of Victoria. 

Chapter IX. — -The Pastoral and Agricultural Development of Australia 391 
By G. A. Sinclair, Agricultural Editor of the Australasian. 

Chapter X. — Mining Fields of AustraliI . . . . . . . . 410 

By E. F. PiTTMAN, A.R.S.M., Government Geologist of New South Wales, 
and A. Gibb ALiiTLAND, F.G.S., Government Geologist of Western 
Australia. 

Chapter XL — Manufactures, Industrial and Commercial Development of 

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 463 

By Gerald Lightfoot, M.A., Barrister-at-law, 

Chapter XII. — Educational Policy and Development . . . . . . 509 

By Francis Anderson, M.A., Professor of Logic and Mental Philosophy in 
the University of Sydney. 

Chapter XIII. — Political Systems of Australia .. .. .. 546 

By W. Harrison Mooee, B.A., LL.D., Professor of Law in the University 
of Melbourne. 

Chapter XIV. — Miscellaneous Notes on Australia, its People, and their 

AcTivrrrES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 581 

By G. H. Knibbs, C.M.G., F.S.S., F.R.A.S., etc.. Commonwealth Statistician. 



0.12154. 



INDEX TO MAPS, ILLUSTRATIONS, ETC 



Map of Australasia 

Map of New South Wales 

Map of Victoria 

Map of Queensland 

Map of South Australia . . 

Map of Western Australia 

Map of Tasmania 

Map of Northern Teri-itory 

Aboriginal Types, Customs, etc. 

Tribal Map of Australia . . 

Physiographic Features in the Vicinity of Sydney 

'J'he Federal Capital Territory 

The Topography of Melbourne and its Environs 

Map of Australia, showing Wet Bulb Isotherms 

Graph of Temperatures of Australian Cities 

Map of Australia, showing Yearly Temperature 

Frost Map of Australia . . 

Rainfall Map of Australia 

Graph of Rainfall of Australian Cities 

Map showing Average Rainfall for Wheat-growing Period 

Graph of Monthly Evaporation at Selected Stations 

Map of Australia showing Isobars 

Graph of Monthly Atmospheric Pressure at Principal Cities 

Relief Map of Australia . . 

Relief Model of Australia 

Tectonic Features of Australia 

Orographical Map of Australia 

Geological Map of Australia 

Geological Section of Australia, West to East 

Geological Section of Australia, North to South 

Map of New Guinea 

Geological Section of Papua 

Railway Systems of Australia 

Graphs of Total Trade, Exports and Imports of the Common w 



ealth 



Chart showing Scheme of PubHc Education in New South Wales 



text. 



* Besides the above, there are several small maps, diagrams, etc., inserted in the 



BRITISH ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 

SCIENCE. 

VISIT TO AUSTRALIA, 1914. 



Patron. 
HIS MAJESTY THE KING. 



OFFICERS: 

President. 
Professor William Bateson, M.A., F.R.S. 

Immediate Past President. 
Sir Oliver Lodge, D.Sc, LL.D., F.R.S. 

Vice-Presidents. 

His Excellency the Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia. 
Their Excellencies the Governors of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, 

South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania. 
The Honorable the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth. 
The Honorable the Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, 

South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania. 
The Right Honorable the Lord Mayors of Sydney and Melbourne. 
The Right Worshipful the Mayors of Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, Hobart. 
The Chancellors of the Universities of Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Tasmania, 

Queensland, Western Australia. 

General Treasurer. 
Professor John Perry, D.Sc, LL.D., F.R.S. 

General Secretaries. 

Professor W. A. Herdman, D.Sc, F.R.S. 
Professor H. H. Turner, D.Sc, D.C.L., F.R.S. 

Assistant Secretary. 
0. J. R. Howarth, M.A., Burlington House, London, W. 

Chief Clerk and Assistant Treasurer. 
H. C. StewardsoD, Burlington House, London, W. 



Federal Council tor the Australian Meeting. 

President. — The Honorable the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth. 
Chairman. — Professor Orme Masson, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S., F.R.S.E. 
Secretary. — M. L. Shepherd, Prime Minister's Department, Melbourne. 

General Organizing Secretary for the Australian Meeting. 
A. C. D. Rivett, M.A., D.Sc, University of Melbourne, Victoria. 

Local Ofificers for the Australian Meeting 
New South Wales. 
CAaw man.— Professor T. W. Edgeworth David, C.M.G., B.A., D.Sc, F.R.S. 
Secretary. — J. H. Maiden, F.L.S. 
Treasurer. — H. G. Chapman, M.D., B.S. 

Victoria. 
Chairman. — Professor Orme Masson, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S., F.R.S.E. 
Secretary. — Professor Baldwin Spencer, C.M.G., M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S. 
Treasurer. — Charles Bage, M.A., M.D. 

Queensland. 
Chairman. — Professor B. D. Steele, D.Sc. 
Secretary. — T. E. Jones, B.A. 

South Australia. 
C/iaimaw.— Professor E. C. Stirling. C.M.G., M.A., M.D., D.Sc, F.R.S. 
F.R.C.S. 

Secretary. — Professor Kerr Grant, M.Sc 
Treasurer. — Thomas Gill, I.S.O. 

Western Australia. 
Chairman. — Hon. Walter Kingsmill, B.A., M.L.C. 
Secretary. — James S. Battye, B.A., LL.B. (on leave). 
Acting Secretaries. — Professor W. J. Dakin, D.Sc; W. Catton Grasby, F.L.S. 

Tasmania 

Chairman. — Hon. G. H. Butler. 

Secretary. — Professor T. Thomson Flymi, B.Sc. 

Sectional Officers. 
Section A.— Mathematics and Physics. 
President— VxoiQS.&ov F. T. Trouton, M.A., Sc.D., F.R.S. (London). 
Vice-Presidents.— -:i . H. Jeans, M.A., F.R.S. (Cambridge) ; Professor A. W. 

Porter, B.Sc, F.R.S. (London). 
Recorder. — Professor A. S. Eddington, M.A., M.Sc, (Cambridge). 
Secretaries. — A. 0. Rankine, D.Sc. (London) ; E. Gold, M.A. (London) ; 

Professor S. B. Maclaren. M.A. (Reading). 
Local Secretary for Sydney. — Professor J. A. Pollock, D.Sc. 
Local Secretary for Melbourne.— ^Toiessov T. R. Lyle, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S. 



Section B— Chemistry. 
Prest(ie«/.— Professor W. J. Pope, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S. (Cambridge). 
Vice-Presidents.— Pvoiessor H. B. Dixon, M.A., Ph.D., F.R.S. (Manchester) ; 

F. Clowes, D.Sc, F.I.C. (London). 
Recorder.— A. Holt, M.A., D.Sc. (Liverpool). 
Secretary.— 'N. V. Sidgwick, M.A., D.Sc. (Oxford). 
Local Secretary Jor Sydney. — Professor C. Fawsitt, D.Sc, Ph.D. 
Local Secretary Jor Melbourne. — D. Avery, M.Sc. 

Section C- - Geology. 
President.— 8iv T. H. Holland, K.C.I.E., D.Sc, F.R.S. (Manchester). 
Vice-Presidents. — Professor W. S. Boulton, D.Sc. (Birmingham) ; Professor 

J. W. SoUas, ScD., Ph.D., LL.D., F.R.S. (Oxford). 
Recorder. — -A. R. Dwerryhouse, D.Sc. (Belfast). 
Secretary. — Professor S. H. Reynolds, M.A. (Bristol). 
Local Secretary jor Sydney. — -E. F. Pittman, A.R.S.M. 
Local Secretary jor Melbourne. — -Professor E. W. Skeats, D.Sc, A.R.C.S,, F.G.S. 

Section D.— Zoology. 

President. — Professor Arthur Dendy, D.Sc, F.R.S. (London). 
Vice-Presidents. -^B.. F. Gadow, Ph.D., F.R.S. (Cambridge) ; Professor 

E. A. Minchin, Ph.D., F.R.S. (London). 
Recorder.— Karett Tims, M.A., M.D. (Cambridge). 
Secretaries. — -R. D. Laurie, M.A. (Liverpool) ; J. H. Ashworth, D.Sc. 

(Edinburgh). 
Local Secretary jor Sydney. — -Professor W. A. Haswell, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S. 
Local Secretary jor Melbourne.— T. S. Hall, M.A., D.Sc. 

Section E — Geography. 

PrmfZeni.— Sir C. P. Lucas, K.C.B., K.C.M.G. (London). 

Vice-Presidents.— W. S. Bruce, LL.D., F.R.S.E. (Edinburgh) ; Sir Daniel 

Morris, K.C.M.G., D.Sc. 
Recorder.— R. Yule Oldham, M.A. (Cambridge). 
Secretary. — J. McFarlane, M.A. (Manchester). 
Local Secretary jor Sydney. — -F. Poate. 
Local Secretary jor Melbourne. — J. A. Leach, D.Sc. 

Section F.— Economic Science and Statistics. 

President. — Professor E. C. K. Gonner, M.A. (Liverpool). 
Vice-President. — Sir Henry Cunynghame, K.C.B. (Folkestone). 
Recorder. — Professor Kirkaldy, M.A., M.Comm., B.Litt. (Birmingham). 
Ijocal Secretary jor Sydney. — ^Professor R. F. L'vine. M.A. 
Local Secretary jor Melbourne.— G. H. Knibbs, C.M.G., F.R.A.S., F.S.S. 

Section G.— Engineering. 
President.— Professor E. G. Coker, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S.E. (London). 
Vice-Presidents. — Professor Petavel D.Sc, F.R.S. (Manchester) ; Professor 

George Forbes, M.A., F.R.S., M.List. C.E. (London). 
Recorder. — Professor G. W. 0. Howe, M.Sc. (London). 
Secretary. — Professor W. M. Thornton, D.Sc. (Newcastle). 
Local Secretary jor Sydney. — Professor W. H. Warren, M.Iiist. C.E. 
Local Secretary jor Melbourne. — Professor H. Payne, M.Inst. C.E., M.LMech.E. 



Section H.— Anthropology. 
President. — Sir Everavd im Tliurn, C.B., K.C.M.G. (London). 
Vice-Presidents. — Sir Richard Temple, Bart., C.I.E.; Henry Balfour, M.A. 

(Oxford). 
Recorder. — E. W. Martindell, M.A. (London). 
Secretary.— B,. R. Marett, M.A., D.Sc. (Oxford). 

Local Secretary Jar Sydney. —l^roiessov J. T. Wilson, M.B., Ch,M., F.R.S. 
Local Secretary Jor Melbourne. — -Professor R. J. A. Berry, M.B., F.R.C.S., 

F.R.S.E. 

Section I —Physiology. 

President.^BT. C. J. Martin, M.D., D.Sc., F.R.S. (London). 
Vice-Presidents.— ¥roiessov\Y. D. Halliburton, M.D., LL.D., F.R.S. (London) ; 

Professor C. S. Sherrington, M.A., M.D., D.Sc, LL.D., F.R.S. (Oxford). 
Recorder. — Professor P. T. Herring, M.D. (St. Andrews). 
Secretary.— 'Pvoiessov T. H. Milroy, M.D., B.Sc, F.R.S.E. (Belfast). 
Local Secretary Jor Sydney. — -Professor T. P. Anderson Stuart, M.D., Ch.M., 

LL.D., D.Sc. 
Local Secretary for Melbourne. — ^Professor W. A. Osborne, M.B., B.Ch., D.Sc. 

Section K.— Botany. 

President. — Professor F. 0. Bower, D.Sc, F.R.S. (Glasgow). 
Vice-Presidents.— Pvoiessor A. C. Seward, M.A., F.R.S. (Cambridge) ; Mis.s 

E. R. Saunders (Cambridge). 
Recorder.— C. E. Moss, D.Sc (Cambridge). 
Secretary. — Miss E. N. Thomas, B.Sc. (London). 
Local Secretary for Sydney. — Professor A. A. Lawson, D.Sc, F.R.S.E. 
Local Secretary for Melbourne. — Professor A. J. Ewart, D.Sc, Ph.D., F.L.S. 

Section L. Educational Science. 

President. — Professor John Perry, D.Sc, LL.D., F.R.S. (London). 
Vice-Presidents. — Professor Henry E. Armstrong, Ph.D., LL.D., F.R.S. 

(London) ; G. T. Moody, D.Sc. (London). 
Recorder. — -Professor J. A. Green, M.A. (Sheffield). 
Secretary. — C. A. Buckmaster, M.A. (London). 
Local Secretary for Sydney. — P. Board, M.A. 
Local Secretary for Melbourne. — -J. Smyth, M.A., Ph.D. 

Section M.— Agriculture. 

President.— A. D. Hall, M.A., F.R.S. (London). 

Vice-Presidents. — Profes.sor Wood, M.A. (Cambridge), E. S. Beaven (Cam- 
bridge). 
Recorder. — J. Golding, F.LC. (Reading). 
Secretary. — Alex. Lauder, D.Sc. (Edinburgh). 
Local Secretary for Sydney. — Professor R. D. Watt, M.A., B.Sc. 
Local Secretary for Melbourne. — Professor T. Cherry, M.D., M.S. 



FEDERAL COUNCIL, MARCH 1914. 



Commonwealth— 

The Honorable Joseph Cook, M.P., Prime Minister of the Common- 
wealth of Australia. 
The Eight Honorable Andrew Fisher, M.P., P.C. 
The Honorable A. Deakin. 
J. A. Gilruth, D.V.Sc, M.E.C.V.S., F.E.S.E. 
Atlee Hunt, C.M.G. 
H. A. Hunt, F.E. Met. Soc. 
G. H. Knibbs, C.M.G., F.E.A.S., F.S.S. 
The Honorable Chas. McDonald, M.P. 
A. C. D. Eivett, M.A., D.Sc. 

Professor Baldwin Spencer, C.M.G., M.A., D.Sc, F.E.S. 
Senator the Honorable H. Turley. 

Members Ex Officio. 
President Associated Chambers of Manufactures. 
President Associated Chambers of Commerce. 
Chairman Associated Banks. 

President Commercial Travellers' Association of Australasia. 
Chief President Australian Natives' Association. 
Chairman Australian Steam-ship Owners' Federation. 

New South Wales— 

The Honorable Thomas Brown, M.P. 

E. H. Cambage, President Eoyal Society of New South Wales. 

H. G. Chapman, M.D., B.S. 

Professor T. W. Edgeworth David, C.M.G., B.A., D.Sc, F.E.S. 

J. H. Maiden, F.L.S. 

E. Teece, F.I.A., F.F.A., F.S.S. 

Victoria— 

J. W. Barrett, C.M.G., M.D., M.S., F.E.C.S. 

Professor T. E. Lyle, M.A., D.Sc, F.E.S. 

J. H. MacFarland, M.A., LL.D. (Vice Chancellor of the University). 

W. Maloney, L.S.A., M.P. 

Professor Orme Masson, M.A., D.Sc, F.E.S., F.E.S.E. 

Professor H. Payne, M.I.C.E., M.I.M.E. 

C. C. Salmon, L.E.C.P., L.E.C.S., M.P. 

Queensland— 

A. H. H. Feez, K.C 

W. F. Finlayson, M.P. 

Professor A. J. Gibson, A.M.I.C.E. 

The Honorable L. E. Groom, M.A., LL.M., M.P. 

Professor H. J. Priestly, M.A. 

Professor Bertram D. Steele, D.Sc 

The Honorable A. H. Whittingham, M.L.C 



South Australia— 

W. 0. Ai-chibald, M.P. 

The Honorable P. McM. Glynn, M.P., K.C. 

Professor Kerr Grant, M.Sc. 

H. Angas Parsons, M.H.A. 

Professor E. C. Stirling, C.M.G., M.A., M.D., D.Sc, F.R.S., F.R.C.S 

The Right Honorable Sir S. J. Way, Bart., P.C, LL.D. 

Western Australia— 

W. Catton Grasby, F.L.S. 

The Honorable J. M. Powler, M.P. 

Senator the Honorable Hugh de Largie. 

Tasmania— 

L. Atkinson, M.P. 
Professor T. Thomson Flynn, B.Sc. 
Senator the Honorable J. J. Long. 
Fritz Noetling, M.A., Ph.D. 

New Zealand- 
Professor H. B. Kirk, M.A. 
Professor T. H. Laby, B.A. 




SOUTH AUSTRALIA 



Statute Miles 




TASMANIA 



statute M/Ves 




NORTHERN TERRITORY 



100 zoo 



St^Zut^ Mi/es 



CHAPTER I. 
HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA. 

By Ernest Scott, Professor of History in the University of Melbourne. 



SYNOPSIS. 



1. The Name of Australia. 

2. Coastal Explokatiox. 

3. The Fousdation of Settlement. 

4. The Convict System. 

5. Inland Exploration. 

6. Extension of Colonization. 



7. Progress of Settlement. 

8. The Gold Discoveries. 

9. Constitutional Government. 

10. The Achievement of Federation. 

11. Bibliography. 



1. The Name of Australia. 

The name Australia was given to the great southern continent by 
Matthew Flinders, the navigator. Before his time, it was generally called 
New Holland ; but, as he pointed out, the Dutch had known nothing of the 
southern and eastern coasts, whilst the name New South Wales, which 
Cook gave to the eastern portion, could not be applied to the whole country, 
since Cook had known nothing of the west, north-west, and south. Flinders 
wanted a convenient name that would describe the entire area which his 
own researches had demonstrated to be one large island. He was writing 
his Voyage to Terra Australis while held a prisoner by the French in Ile-de- 
France (Mauritius), from 1803-1810, and it occurred to him that " Aus- 
tralia " would be a good, serviceable name. He did not invent the word. 
De Brosses, in his Histoire des Navigations aux Terres Australes (Paris, 1756), 
had coined the word " Australasia " as a name for a division of the globe, 
and Dalrymple, in the preface to his Historical Collection of Voyages and 
Discoveries in the South Pacific Ocean (London, 1770), suggested "Australia" 
as a name for the region east of South America. Shaw and Smith, in 
their Zoology and Botany of New Holland (1793), spoko of " the ontincnt 
of Australia, Australasia or New Holland," but it is not probable that 
Flinders had over seen their book. He sought to secure official sanction for 
the adoption of the name for this continent. He used it repeatedly 
in his correspondence after 1804, and first employed it publicly in a geo- 
graphical paper, written in French, and published by Malte-Brun, in the 
Annales des Voyages (Paris, 1810). But lie was by no means sure that the 
innovation would be approved. " II reste a savoir," he wrote, " si ce nom 
sera adopte par des geographes europeens." When he was liberated and 
returned to England, he endeavoured to bring the name into official 
use, but Sir Joseph Banks was not favorable, and Arrowsmith, the pub- 
lisher of Admiralty charts, " did not like the change " because his firm had 
always employed " New Holland " in their publications. The history of 
Flinders' explorations, which was semi-official, was therefore issued under 
the title A Voyage to Terra Australis, and the name Australia was merely 
suggested in a footnote " as being more agreeable to the ear and an assimi- 
lation to the names of the other great portions of the earth."* He was 
to some extent " tongue-tied by authoritv," and the name " New Holland " 

* .1 Vomine to TfTrit Aunlralix (London, 1«14), Vol. I.; the history of the name is discussed in the 
writer's lAfe of MaUheio Flinders (Sydney, 1913), chapter 30. 

0.12154 



2 Federal Handbook. 



was used in official despatches for 40 years after he had recommended the more 
convenient designation, though Governor Macquarie, in a despatch of April, 
1817, expressed the hope that " Australia " would in future be employed, 
and Peter Cunningham, the botanist, in his Two Years in New South 
Wales (1827), referred to " Australia, as we colonials sav."* But 
Flinders' choice has been abundantly justified, and there is some satis- 
faction in remembering that the name borne by Australia was given to her 
by one of the most intrepid and skilful of her maritime explorers, and one 
who was in the full sense a man of science. 

2. Coastal Exploration. 

There is no sound historical evidence to support the belief that any part 
of Australia was known to Europeans before the end of the sixteenth century. 
The Portuguese rounded the Cape of Good Hope in 1497, and their ships 
began to employ the Cape route to Calicut and the East Indies after 1498. 
The Spaniards rounded Cape Horn, crossed the Pacific, and reached the 
Philippines in 1521. But if either Portuguese or Spanish ships sighted 
Australia, west or east, before 1606, record of the fact has not yet come 
to light. Speculation points to the persistence of rumours about a southern 
Terra Incognita, or Terra Australis, and it may be considered probable that 
at a period when it was not unusual for a ship to be blown hundreds of miles 
out of her course, some part of the coast may have been seen. But proffered 
"proofs" of very early discoveries prove nothing except the existence of a 
vague sense of what proof is. That the Dutch knew of Australia before the 
dawn of the seventeenth century is clear. In 1598, Cornelius AVytfliet wrote 
of Terra Australis as the most southern of all lands, and as separated from 
New Guinea by a narrow strait. That is definite and true ; but the Dutch 
writer mentioned no particular ship that had sailed through the strait. We 
come in contact with an actual navigator who had some part in the stoiv in 
connexion with the voyage of Pedro Fernandez de Quiros, in 1606. 

Quiros, in command of two Spanish ships, discovered the New Hebrides, 
and thought he had found the great continent which he believed to exist 
at the southern end of the globe. He called it Austrialia del Espiritu Santo. 
The first word in the name is supposed to contain a compliment to Philip 
III. of Spain, who also ruled Austria,t and is not the source whence '' Aus- 
tralia " is derived. Quiros sailed east for Peru, but his second in command, 
Luis de Torres, took a western course, and found the strait lying between 
Papua and the northern extremity of Australia. In the same year the 
Dutch ship Duyfhen entered the Gulf of Carpentaria, and her captain reported 
on reaching Java that there was no passage through to the Pacific in that 
neighbourhood. 

The Dutch became acquainted with the west coast partly through a 
series of accidents, partly in consequence of a change of route to the East 
Indies. Prior to 1611, their customary course after rounding the Cape of 
Good Hope was north to Madagascar, and then in a direct line east to Java 
or north-east to India. But it was discovered that by sailing about 3,000 miles 
due east from the Cape, ships met with favorable winds, and could then run 

• M. Phillips, A Colonial Autocracy, p. 2. 

t See Markham, Vryages of Quiros (Hakluyt Society), Vol. I., p. xxx. 



History op Australia. 



north to Java, and complete the voyage from Holland in several months less 
than by taking the route to Madagascar in the first instance. The consequence 
of this change of route, which was ordered by the directors of the East India 
Company, was that ships voyaging from the Cape to the East Indies frequently 
found themselves off a strange, desolate coast, which one captain after another 
marked down upon his charts, until the whole outline from the Gulf of Car- 
pentaria to the south-west corner, at Cape Leeuwin, was mapped. The best 
known of the Dutchmen who stumbled upon the western coast in this manner 
was Francis Pelsart, whose ship in 1628 ran aground on the Abrollos Reef. 
In 1642 the Governor of Java, Antony van Diemen, wishing to know more 
of these southern lands, despatched an experienced navigator, Abel Tasman, 
with two ships, the Heemskerk and the Zeehan, on a voyage of exploration. 
Tasman discovered the island which now bears his name, though he did not 
know that it was an island ; and he called it Van Diemen's Land, " in honour 
of the Governor-General, our master, who sent us out to make discoveries." 

The first Englishman to visit Australia was William Dampier, who, first in 
1686, on board a buccaneering ship, the Swan, and secondly, in 1699, in com- 
mand of the Roebuck, sailed along the western and north-western coasts. 
He was not impressed by what he saw of the country. '' If it were not for 
that sort of pleasure which results from the discovery even of the barrenest 
spot upon the globe," he wrote, " this coast of New Holland would not have 
charmed me much." It was owing to the fact that the Dutch and Dampier 
always saw Australia from that aspect where it looks most forbidding, that 
attempts to ascertain the nature of the country, its possibilities of develop 
ment, and its capabilities for settlement, did not ensue for 190 years after 
its whereabouts were definitely known. 

The voyage of James Cook in 1768-70 brought the east coast of Australia 
for the first time to the knowledge of the English Government. The main 
object of Cook's Endeavour voyage was not to explore, but to observe a 
transit of Venus at Tahiti. The observation was made on 3rd June, 1769. 
After fulfilling the appointed duty, Cook ran down to New Zealand, and 
sailed round it, thus disposing of a theory entertained before his time that 
the country formed part of a great antarctic continent. He resolved to 
return to England by way of the East Indies, and to follow the east coast 
of New Holland wherever it might lead. The Endeavour sighted the xVus- 
tralian coast opposite Cape Everard at six in the morning on 20th April, 
1770. Cook named the point Cape Hicks, after Lieutenant Hicks, the 
officer on watch, who was " the first to discover this land." He followed 
the coast northward, discovered Botany Bay (at first called Stingray Bay) 
on 29th April, and anchored there. On 6th May, the Endeavour, pursuing 
her voyage, came abreast of Port Jackson, which was named after Sir George 
Jackson, one of the Secretaries to the Admiralty. Cook did not enter the 
harbor, which is now the glory of the largest city in Australia. He completed 
his northward voyage, cleared the reefs of Torres Strait, and " took 
possession of the whole eastern coast by the name of New South Wales."* 

* It has been said that Cook did not originate the name Now South Wabs, and it is true tliat 
thr: name doRS not a iii)far in his journals. Bladen, the editor of th • Hiatoric.d Rirord of Xeiv South 
Walcx (f., 170), Ktti'n so far as to say that "the name ai)ii •ar'* to lnv,; ori«iiuvted witli Hawkesworth." ' 
who edited Cook's voyaKC. But Kitson {Life of Cook. p. ]40| ciU's a letter writti'ii by Cook. 1771 
whi^rein he uses the words : "the east coast of New Holland, or what I c.ill New South Wab-i;." 
Hawkejworth, It would therefore appear, obtained the name from ('ook hinwtlf 

A 2 



Federal Handbook. 



The exploration of tlie Australian coastline was not completed until 
after tte Jt5ritish had commenced to colonize the country. In 1797 Surgeon 
George Bass, of H.M.S. Reliance, obtained from Governor Hunter the use 
of a whaleboat, a crew of six bluejackets, and provisions for six weeks. With 
this equipment, he left Port Jackson, voyaged southward, and discovered 
Westernport (January, 1798). He did not actually demonstrate the existence 
of a strait separating Australia from Tasmania, but the heavy sea rolling in 
from the westward gave him " much reason to conclude " that there was a 
passage through. In October, 1798, Bass, in company with his friend, 
Lieutenant Matthew Flinders, sailed through the strait in the Norfolk, 2.5 tons, 
and circumnavigated Tasmania. 

In 1802 Lieutenant John Murray discovered Port Phillip ; Grant, in the 
Lady Nelson, sailing from the Cape of Good Hope to Australia, came upon 
the coast near Cape Banks, and discovered the stretch eastward, round 
Cape Otway, to the Port Phillip opening ; and Flinders, in the Investigator, 
thoroughly explored the whole of the south coast from the head of the Great 
Australian Bight. He discovered Kangaroo Island and St. Vincent's and 
Spencer's Gulfs. In Encounter Bay he met Le Geogra'phe, Captain Nicholas 
Baudin, a French exploring ship sent out by the Consular Government, 
Napoleon having acceded to a request submitted by the Institute of France 
that a scientific expedition should be despatched to examine the unknown 
coasts of New Holland, and to collect specimens for the Museum at Paris. 
Baudin died before his ships returned to France, and the maps published 
with the history of his voyage affixed the name Terre Napoleon to the whole 
southern coast from Wilson's Promontory to the head of the Bight. Some 
writers have attached a political significance to the Terre Napoleon maps, 
but in the present writer's opinion the name was a mere piece of courtiership, 
and there is no evidence to show that Napoleon ever designed to acquire 
territory in Australia, though at a later date (1810) he directed his fleet 
based upon Mauritius to " take Port Jackson," where much-needed pro- 
visions could be found.* 

Flinders circumnavigated the continent in 1803, and after his very re- 
markable voyages there was no more coastal exploratory work to do in 
Australia, except to fill in details. 



3. The Foundation of Settlement. 

In 1783, James Matra, who had been a midshipman with Cook, submitted 
to Lord Sydney a scheme for establishing in New South Wales a colony 
wherein Great Britain might afiord an asylum to the American loyalists, 
who had been rendered homeless by the result of the War of Independence. 
The country, Matra urged, was bound by every tie of honour and gratitude 
to protect and support those who had risked everything in support of British 
rule in North America, and should provide a place where they might " repair 
their broken fortunes and again enjoy their former domestic felicity." The 
loyalists found homes in Canada, but Lord Sydney recognised that Matra's 
plan afforded a means of overcoming another difficulty with which the Govern- 
ment was faced. It had been customary to ship convicts to America, where, 

* See the writer's Terre SapoUon (London, 1910) 



History of Australia. 



especially in the southern States, there was a demand for labour. Contractoi's 
were willing to undertake to convey convicted persons across the Atlantic. 
and were able to dispose of them by " assignment " to purchasers, who 
would often give £8 or £10 for a strong male convict, especially if he were a 
mechanic. The prisoners were, in fact, sold into servitude. The establish- 
ment of the United States as an independent country put an end to this 
trafl&c. At the same time, the English prison system was discreditably bad. 
Gaols were too few, and too small ; were overcrowded, dirty, and centres of 
disease. Lord Sydney, discussing Matra's scheme with its author, pointed 
out that New South Wales appeared to be " a very proper region for the 
reception of criminals condemned to transportation." Matra accordingly 
amended his project, drawing up an addendum wherein he argued for the 
reformatory efficacy of a colony far removed from Great Britain, with a 
healthy climate, and an abundance of fertile soil, where persons who had been 
guilty of crimes might work out their own redemption. Sir Joseph Banks, 
who had been botanist with Cook, and was now (since 1778) President of the 
Royal Society, gave the scheme his hearty support ; and in 1786 the Govern- 
ment directed the equipment of a fleet to convey 750 convicts to Botany 
Bay. 

Arthur Phillip, a captain in the Navy, was chosen to command the expe- 
dition, which consisted of the Sirius, a sixth rater, the Supply, tender, six 
transports, and three store ships. There were about 1,100 people aboard, 
of whom 208 were marines to guard the convicts. 

The whole fleet had arrived at Botany Bay by 20th January, 1788, but 
Phillip was soon convinced that the situation was quite unfit for the purpose. 
He therefore judged it advisable to examine Port Jackson, which was marked 
on Cook's chart a few miles to the northward. There he " had the satisfac- 
tion of finding the finest harbor in the world, in which a thousand sail of the 
line may ride in the most perfect security." Returning to Botany Bay, 
he ordered the fleet to sail round to Port Jackson, and on the 26th January 
the flag was unfurled at Sydney Cove, where Phillip had decided to plant his 
new settlement. 

While the British vessels were lying at anchor in Botany Bay, two French 
ships under the command of Laperouse appeared. It has been by some 
writers surmised that the French navigator was endeavouring to forestall 
the English in the occupation of Australian soil. One historian puts it 
that " it is seizure, not discovery, which gives a title by the law of nations, 
and there is therefore some justification for saying that England won Aus- 
tralia by six days."* But it is quite certain that Laperouse had no such 
acquisitive design in view. His longboat had been destroyed, and some 
of his company were massacred by natives in Samoa. Consequently his 
strength was so seriously depleted that if he had lost any more men he would 
have been compelled to beach and destroy one of his ships. Wishing, there- 
fore, to put together a new longboat, the frame of which he had in the hold, 
he decided to sail to Botany Bay — knowing its whereabouts from Cook's 
Chart — where he thought his men would be able to work without interference. 
The French remained there from 27th January to 15th March, on excellent 

• Jenks, History of the Auntrulasian Colonies (ISO.'i), p. 30. Sco the present writer's Laperouse 
(Sydney, 1912). 



Federal Handbook. 



terms with tlie British officers who visited them. Phillip was too busy laying 
the foundation of Sydney to visit Laperouse personally, and the French navi- 
gator did not enter Port Jackson. 

The difficulties that Phillip had to encounter during the four years of his 
governorship were of the most serious kind. The officers quarrelled, the 
convicts were poor material for pioneering, skilled workmen were few, sup- 
plies were wholly insufficient, and provision ships were wrecked. Over a 
thousand more convicts were sent out, and an additional thousand were 
announced, before there was accommodation for them or food to feed them. 
The natives gave trouble, and the Home Government failed to appreciate 
the need for a steady supply of free agricultural and artisan settlers. But 
Phillip did at length get the colony on its feet, and for the wisely planned 
and energetically pursued administrative work that he did he is indeed 
memorable as one of the veritable builders of the British Empire. 

4. The Convict System. 

After the departure of Phillip, the colony was for three years adminis- 
tered by officers of the New South Wales corps : by Major Grose during 
1793 and 1794, and by Captain Paterson during 1795, when Governor Hunter 
succeeded. PhiJIip had id e a s— Qf__£xten ding development _iij ' means ol free 
sptj^lpyp pirlerl by the ugp r'f c ^ivict lab our ; but for over twenty years Sydney 
was little better than a prison compound, walled by mountains and fronted 
by the sea, wherein felons, political offenders, and many an unfortunate 
whose punishment was cruelly out of proportion to his offence, were 
" yarded " together under a discipline enforced by the lavish application of 
the lash. During the first seventeen years ofset tlement 12,2 2£L persons 
were jransported, a nd_asJate; g;s'i:8± Qlitli calculated that there were not more 
than 700 settl ers who had not been se nt, out '' lQFlheix__cou5tryj~^good.'' 
The prisoners included a considerable number of political prisoners who 
had been convicted for connexion with the Irish rebellion of 1798, and the 
Scottish revolution societies of 1793 ; just as at a later date working men 
concerned with the beginnings of English trade unionism were transported. 
Du ring the goy ernships ofHunter, King, aii dBligh, from 1796 to 1809, no 
sprinn.s- affovts were niadp_ jT)_Jridiice free settlem ent, which w as, indeed, at 
time s rather disco uraged. 

The study of the historical material relating to these years of dark dawning 
is often painful and depressing. An atmosphere of hatred, violence, and sus- 
picion pervaded the colony. • Every Governor was perplexed and hampered, 
not only by the refractory human material with which he had to work, 
but by the jealousy of .his officers. King was a high-minded man, but he 
found no loyal spirit of co-operation among his subordinates. The officers 
of the New South Wales corps made large profits by trafficking in rum, and the 
endeavour to suppress the iniquities of the trade provoked resentment, 
followed, in Governor Bligh's case, by open mutiny. 

The quarrel between Bligh and John Macarthur, a bold, spirited, and hot- 
tempered officer, who founded sheep-farming in Australia, was pricked to 
a crisis in 1807, when the Governor confiscated a still which Macarthur had 
imported. Bligh, incensed by Macarthur's " inimicability of mind to Govern- 
ment," had him arrested and put on trial. But Macarthur had a large 



History of Australia. 



personal following, and Bligh's arbitrary methods had made him unpopular. 
Major Johnson, who commanded the military forces, refused to obey his 
orders, and followed up his act of insubordination by marching his troops 
to Government Housfe and arresting the Governor. He took this revolu- 
tionary step (January, 1808) on a requisition signed by Macarthur and about 
100 of the inhabitants of Sydney, some of whom, Bligh declared, " are the 
worst class of life,'-' but who at all events pledged themselves to support 
Johnson with thei^' fortunes and their lives. Bligh was kept in confinement 
for a year, the alfai;:s of the colony being administered by Lieutenant-Colonel 
Paterson, of the Van Diemen's Land settlement, who held a Lieutenant- 
Governor's commission. The end of this startling incident was that Johnson 
was tried by court-martial in England, and cashiered ; Macarthur, who 
went to England, ^was prohibited from returning to New South Wales for 
eight years ; and Bligh was superseded in the Governorship by Colonel 
Lachlan Macquarie. 

Macquarie was hardly less dictatorial than his predecessor had been ; 
and the long period of his rule is fairly described in the title of the book 
wherein it is most thoroughly explained, A Colonial Autocracij.^ He was 
vain, and could be quarrelsome and harsh. But he had a way of getting things 
done. He was a builder, a colonizer, a statesman, and as his obstinacy 
was exerted in a progressive direction, he managed to fight through prejudices 
and hindrances to merited popularity. One principle for w^hich he fought 
hard was that when a convict had served his period of sentence, and was 
again a free man, he was entitled " to be considered on a footing with every 
other man in the colony according to his rank in life and character." He 
appointed to the commission of the peace a clergyman who had been trans- 
ported for suspected complicity in the Irish rebellion, and invited to his own 
table four or five " emancipists " who happened to be men of education and 
manners. But^this polic e; gave deep^ ffence to many settlers who_.had no 
black marks against their names, and wTio cq ngid£red_ih.emselves as per- 
tainin g to a kind of moral ariatocracy^ — Xh c r c scn t^ ment was e specially bitter 
among the old adherents of Bligh, who from the first had looked askance 
on his successor, and were not averse from fomenting a quarrel with him. 
In some instances the Governor's zeal for the liberal treatment of emancipists 
led him too far, and incurred the disfavour of the Secretary of State ; and he 
became involved in quarrels with the judicial officers, who would not permit 
emancipist attorneys to practise before them. But there was so little that 
was liberal in spirit in these early days of New South Wales that, even when 
Macquarie's acts were marked by errors of discretion, it is good to recognise 
the sense of justice that prompted them. 

The convict system was in full force for just over fifty years. From firsbx 
to . lasi,— aWu L 1 20rWU£)ni e n and women wei'e transpo rted to Australi a and ] 



Va n Diemen's Land, of"wlT(5 nT7T"n [KHi, nearly '50,0()() wer e living in the / / 
country. Half of these were~"~us^i^iH'd "" people ; TTiat is, they were living / \/ 
upoiTthe properties of free settiei's, to perfoim compulsory labour for them. C 
The remainder were working for the Government in penal establishments or \ 
in " road gangs." The inhumane features of the system are exposed in J 
the report of an English Parliamentary Committee of 1837-8 ; and the}:>/ 



■^ Colonial Autocracy, by .Marion I'liillip's. {U>mh>u, lltd'.i.) 



Federal Handbook. 



L 



are described with gaunt realism in a piece of fiction which has a backing of 
sober fidelity — Marcus Clarke's For the Term of his Natural Life. 

The Parliamentary Committee recommended that no more convicts 
should be sent to Australia, and an Order in Council issued in 1840 directed 
that transportation should cease. But Van Diemen's Land continued to be 
used for the purpose, with consequences that soon became alarming. The 
dumping of 3,000 convicts per annum in an island, where the means of coping 
with the influx were inadequate, brought about a crisis, which British Ministers 
sought to mitigate by re-instituting transportation to the mainland under 
another name. The "' conditional pardon system " was devised. Under it, 
a convicted person who had served a preliminary term in an English prison 
might be shipped to Australia, where he would be free, subject to the " con- 
dition " that he did not return to England during the remainder of the term 
of his sentence. Som_e convicts were sent to Victoria, asjwell,^^ to New South 
Wa les, under thi s system7'~~-Bttt--a-^vigorous---ainJ''vociferous public opinion 
had by this time grown up in these colonies. The period had passed when 
they were content to have the contents of English gaols emptied at their 
doors. The people of Melbourne, in 1849, organized to resist the incursion; 
and threatened to prevent by force the landing of the " exiles." An equally 
strong feeling of resistance manifested itself in Sydney ; and British Ministers 
were astonished to realize that, in a country originally colonized to carry 
out a transportation system, the first large question of public policy about 
which public opinion pronounced itself in emphatic terms was that trans- 
portation should cease. Governor Fitzroy yielded to the agitation, and the 
exiles — styled " Pentonvillains," after Pentonville prison wherein they served 
their probationary period — were sent on to Moreton Bay. Earl Grey, the 
responsible British Minister, very reluctantly gave way, and shortly afterwards 
the shipping of convicts to any part of the country except Van Diemen's 
Land and Western Australia ceased. The former colony was still used as a 
penal settlement until 1852, and signalized her deliverance (1856) by changing 
her name to Tasmania. We gtern Australia, b eingurgently inne gd of labou r, 
gladly r eceived convicts frorn ^lH^*^, '^"d even proteate H against the d iscon- 
tinuance_ of the supp ly. She continued her policy long after the other Aus- 
tralian Colonies had freed themselves from what they termed " the convict 
taint." Her persistence, indeed, provoked much bitter feeling, and threats 
to boycott Western Australia were made by responsible statesmen in the 
eastern colonies. There is no doubt that the system did much to establish 
Western Australia, and her prosperity was well assured when, in 1868, trans- 
portation was finally discontinued. 

5. Inland Exploration. 

From the earliest period of settlement, the problem of the inland explora- 
tion of Australia obtruded itself as difficult and dangerous. For a quarter 
of a century after Sydney was founded, no practicable path was discovered 
across the mountain barrier that lay in the background. The Blue Moun- 
tains are not a very lofty range ; they do not rise beyond 4,500 feet ; but 
their tumbled formation made them a really formidable barricade, and they 
shut the little community at Port Jackson within an enclosure extending 
only about 40 miles from the sea. An escaped convict made his way inland 



History of Australia. 



during Hunter's governorship, and several explorers endeavoured to find 
a pass. But-it-was^n ot ti ll^J813_ that Gregory B la,ylaTid^_axir'.n7ppqnipr| by 
Lawsoii_ajid^— WiiatJUiilJi,--dia£overed a pra cticable track, and opened to 
occu pation the richly-gra ssed Bathurst Plains. 

Hardly any portion oTTEe^' g l obe h ft«— presented so sullenly obstinate a 
face against the explorer as Australia has done ; and there are few countries 
wherein gloomy predictions concerning the prospects of settlement have been 
so completely falsified. Immense stretches of territory which to-day are 
yielding an abundance of wealth to industry were originally condemned as 
wholly unfit for human habitation. The price of investigation has often 
been paid in suffering and death ; and Australia is fully conscious of her 
obligation to a succession of hardy and courageous men who are as truly her 
heroes as are warriors to other peoples. 

The first achievement of note in the story, after Blaxland's, is that of 
John Oxley, who in 1817-8 led two expeditions west and north, and came in 
touch with the complicated river system that feeds the Murray. Five 
years later he penetrated Queensland territory as far as Port Curtis, and 
prp.parpH thp way for the setjjement which has grown i nto the city of 
&riabane. 

A very important inland journey was that of Hamilton Hume and William 
Hovell in 1824. They discovered and crossed the River Murray, the prin- 
cipal water-course in Australia, continued south, found the Ovens and the 
Goulburn, traversed a portion of the fertile western h alf of Victoria, and 
we ^ the fi rst Europea ns to come upo'n Port Phillip fmm tViP la nH war d. 
Allan Cunningham, the botanist, a protege of Sir Joseph Banks, between 
1817 and 1830 made a series of excursions into untra versed areas, discovering 
a practical pa^s to the Liverpool Plains (1818) and an easy route to the 
Darling Downs (1828). His botanical work was of the utmost importance, 
and his explorations won him a place among the most enterprising of 
Australian pioneers. 

One of the greatest names in the story is that of Charles Sturt, a captain 
of the 39th regiment quartered in Sydney during the regime of Governor 
Darling. On his first journey, in28282:9;_jg_disgQ3^£red the Darfaig River ; 
and on a seconTl joiiriiey, comnienced in 1829, he took with him the timbers 
of an old whaleboat, nailed them together on the banks of the Murrum- 
bidgee, descended the stream to its junction with the Murray, and floated 
down that great river until, after a voyage of 33 days, he heard " the distant 
thunder of the great Southern Ocean." He had floated into Lake Alexan- 
drina, wherein the waters of the Murray disembogue. Severe hardships 
were endured on the return journey. Sturt's party had consumed their 
last morsel of food when relief came, and some of his men showed signs of 
insanity, from incessant toil and privations. Sturt himself was blinded 
for a time. This journey had more immediate consequences aflecting the 
colony of South Australia than that of Hume and Hovell had upon the 
fortunes of Port Phillij:) ; for his reports led to the founding of Adolaj 



Sturt's genius for exploration led him in 1844 to start fronl^delaiTic to 
penetrate the interior of the continent. This he did in a summer of excep- 
tional heat, maintaining a stubborn fight against thirst, hunger, scurvy, 
a pitiless sun, a blistered dpsort, jind a pelting from blasts of hot fine sand. 



10 Federal Handbook. 



He crossed Cooper's Creek, which he discovered and named, but broke down 
a few miles beyond it, and was carried back to Adelaide a stricken man. 
His work cost him his eye-sight, though he lived a quarter of a century 
after his last expedition. Sturt was described as being " brave as a paladin, 
gentle as a girl," and his achievements are, most worthily, ever " freshly 
remembered."* 

Gippsla nd, the eastern wing of Victoria, was entered from New S outh 
"W ales in 1839 by Angus McvAliUa n, when searchmg tor cattle pastures ; and 
in 18:^11— a^-Eolish-_Laa4J—ef--S £ience, iS tr zelecki. accompaniprl hy~± wn stock- 
raiser s, Macarth ur and Riley, also explored the sa me re gion. It was Strze- 
leckTwho suggested the use ot the name Gippsland, in compliment to the 
Governor of New South Wales, and, Australia's loftiest mountain, Kosciusko, 
bears the name of a Polish hero as a consequence of the travels of this 
investigator. 

At about the same period, 1838, Edward John Eyre — a young cattle 
farmer of 2.5, who was afterwards (186-5) to become Governor of Jamaica, 
and was unenviably famous in connexion with an insurrection there — indulged 
a taste for exploring b}^ 'penetrating the unknown country beyond the limits 
nf_Sfriith AuPitrnlinn p^^ttWnent He found Lake Hindmarsh on one of these 
excursions. Ambitious to accomplish something memorable. Eyre led an 
expedition along the shores leading to the Great Australian Bight in 1839, 
and in 1840 decided to explore the interior of the continent to the north of 
Adelaide. He followed the line of the Flinders Range to Lake Torrens, and 
found a stretch of country so impregnated with salt that even rain water 
became brackish after lying a short while on the ground. After discovering 
Lake Eyre, the explorer, dissatisfied with his results, travelled down to the 
coast at Fowlers' Bay, where he established a camp. From this point, he 
resolved to pursue the coastline as far as King George's Sound, and, as the 
enterprise was full of peril, ordered his men to return to Adelaide, while he 
went on alone. But his overseer, Baxter, refused to leave him, and with 
this companion, and three young blacks, Eyre set out in 1841. He had some 
sheep and flour for subsistence. The food did not last long, and before it 
was entirely exhausted, two of the blacks proved treacherous, shot Baxter, 
and plundered the flour bags. Eyre and his one faithful black servant 
continued the journey, living on horse-flesh and quenching their thirst with 
dew collected on a sponge and squeezed into a pot. When at the extremity 
of endurance they sighted a French whaling ship, the Mississippi ; but 
after receiving assistance the iron-willed explorer set out again, and reached 
his goal, King George's Sound, on 7th July, 1841. 

The explorations of Sturt and Eyre had started from Adelaide. AVe 
return to the Sydney side to mention those of Thomas Mitchell and Ludwig 
Leichhardt. Mitchell was the Surveyor-General of New South Wales, and 
from 1831 had explored the interior from Sydney in search of good country 
for settlement. Some of his journeys were full of adventure, notably that 
of 1835, when Richard Cunningham, the brother of Allan Cunningham, 
was murdered by blacks. Mitchell's most memorable piece of work was his 
expedition to " Australia Felix," or Victoria, in 1836. He crossed the 
Murray and traversed the country westward of Hume and Hovell's track 

* The Life of Charles Start ,by Mrs. Xapier Sturt (1899), is an excellent biography. 



History of Australia. 11 



of twelve years before. To his surprise, on reaching Portland Bay, he found 
the huts of white men on its shores, for the Hentys of Tasmania had already 
established a whaling station there, and had become the pioneer settlers of 
Victoria. Mitchell's last of many journeys was undertaken in 1845, when he 
set out to explore a route to the Gulf of Carpentaria. He did not succeed in 
his main object ; but his glowing reports showed the value of the tableland 
of western Queensland, and had important consequences in stimulatina 
settlement. 

Leichhardt was a German man of science who was attracted to the problems 
pertaining to Australian inland exploration. His first important journey 
was in 1844, when he travelled from Sydney to Port Essington, on the north 
coast, arriving there nearly naked, and with rations reduced almost to the 
last crumb. He and his companions had lived partly on the flesh of flying 
foxes, and had found water by observing the flight of bronze-wing pigeons 
towards it. A second expedition was to the far western interior, 1846, and 
from his third, 1848, he never returned. He aimed at crossing the continent 
from east to west, from Moreton Bay to the Swan River. He certainly 
reached the Barcoo, where the letter " L " was found ciit on a tree twenty 
years later ; but exactly where he perished has never been ascertained. 
The fate of Ludwig Leichhardt is one of the unsolved mysteries of the history 
of Australian land exploration, as the fate of George Bass is an unsolved 
mystery pertaining to one of the country's maritime explorers. A. C. 
Gregory, who went out in search of Leichhardt, led expeditions in Northern 
Australia, and crossed the continent south-west to Adelaide in 1858. 

John Macdouall Stuart, who had been with Sturt in 1844, made impor- 
tant journeys to the interior in 1858 and 1859, discovering a fertile and well- 
watered area west of Lake Eyre. His work was so useful that the South 
Australian Government, to stimulate him or others to further efforts, offered 
a reward of £2,000 to the first man who should cross the continent from south 
to north. Stuart started in 1860, and on 22nd April of that year penetrated 
to the very centre of Australia. He was not now in desert country, but 
found the area surrounding his Central Mount Stuart to be well-grassed, 
plentifully watered, and pleasant. But further on he was beaten by thirst, 
thick scrub, and troublesome aboriginals, and was compelled to return to 
Adelaide. In 1861 Stuart started again, and turned back ; but in 1862 
he made his way right across, and on 24th July " was delighted and gratified 
to behold the waters of the Indian Ocean in Van Diemen's Gulf." Stuart's 
journeys were of the greatest value in demonstrating that the interior of 
Australia was conquerable, and in revealing the excellent pasturage to be 
found in portions of the country. 

Contemporary with Stuart's final journey, the sensational and dramatic 
expedition of Burke and Wills took place. It is perhaps the best remem- 
bered of all Australian inland explorations, because of the mystery and 
fatality attaching to it ; though in truth the explorers whose achievements 
liave already been mentioned, Hume, Mitchell, Sturt, Eyre, and Stuart, 
did greater things, and faced equally severe hardships, but " won through " 
by a more perfect bushcraft and finer qualities of leadership. The Burke 
and Wills expedition was organized in 1858, when a sum of about £10,000 
was provided, partly by subscription, partly by the Victorian Parliament, 



12 Federal Handbook. 



for the purpose of promoting an endeavour to cross Australia through the 
centre, from south to north. The command was entrusted to Richard 
O'Hara Burke, a police inspector well known to be a brave and intelligent 
man. The expedition was well equipped, and should have succeeded and 
returned in safety if Burke had exercised sound judgment. A depot was 
established at Cooper's Creek, and from that point, in December, 1861, 
Burke, with Wills and two other men, determined to make a dash for the 
Gulf of Carpentaria. The party did reach the Flinders River, which flows 
into the Gulf, and were within two days' journey of the sea, but they were 
insufficiently provisioned, and had to return to Cooper's Creek. When they 
reached the depot, after four and a half months' absence, they found that 
Brahe, the man whom Burke had left in charge, had left just seven hours 
before. The time he had been instructed to wait had passed, and he had 
resolved to go to Menindie, on the Darling, where the reserves of the expe- 
dition were based. He left some provisions in a hole in the ground, and cut 
the word " Dig " on the bark of a neighbouring tree. When Burke, Wills, 
and King — the fourth man had died on the journey — staggered into the 
Cooper's Creek depot, their condition was desperate. They ate the pro- 
visions they found, and rested a couple of days, debating what course they 
should pursue. Burke, instead of following in Brahe's tracks, as Wills 
wanted to do, insisted on making for a cattle station at Mount Hopeless, 
150 miles away. It was a fatal resolve. They killed their camels for their 
flesh, and crept forward on foot. When within 50 miles of Mount Hopeless 
Burke, not knowing how near he was, gave the order to turn back to Cooper's 
Creek. The pitiful story of the last days of weary, famished life suflered 
by the three is as intensely pathetic as anything in the history of exploration. 
Wills died first, in the hut at Cooper's Creek. Burke and King tried to find 
the encampment of some blacks who had helped their dead companion 
some time before. Burke broke down and died by the way ; King lived 
with the blacks until he was rescued by A. W. Howitt, who had been sent 
out from Melbourne in charge of a relief expedition. He survived until 
1872. 

The tragedy of Burke and Wills does not end the story of Australian 
inland exploration, but may be taken to be the last sensational event in it. 
In Western Australia, the brothers John and Alexander Forrest did brave 
work. The former, after having in 1869 led an expedition in search of 
remains of Leichhardt, set off (1870) to examine the country which had been 
explored by Eyre, along the shores of the Bight. He directed attention to 
the well-grassed areas lying a few miles from the coast. In 1874 John Forrest 
traversed the country intervening between Western Australia and the settled 
portions of South Australia. Alexander Forrest in 1879 explored from the 
De Guy River, on the north-west shoulder of the continent, across to the 
Fitzroy, which flows from the Leopold Range to King Sound ; followed the 
Fitzroy to its source, and then struck north-east to Port Darwin. His 
enterprise opened up 20,000,000 acres of good country, besides showing 
the way to the rich Kmiberley Gold-fields. 

The journeys of Ernest Giles and of Warburton, 1875-6, must be men- 
tioned ; and it should also be said that the several scientific expeditions of 
Baldwin Spencer to the interior, though undertaken primarily for purposes 



History of Australia. 13 



of biological research, have been of the utmost value in a wider sense. They 
have enabled a trained observer to direct attention in a very striking way 
to aspects of the country not commonly indicated by explorers of the usual 
type. 

6. Extension of Colonization. 

Where the explorer pointed the way the pioneer colonist followed ; but 
there was also, for an interesting period, another motive for extending occu- 
pation beyond the original confines. T ^at -g as-the-^fai'eaL of Frencb-^tyalry. 
The fierce animosity, generated between England and France as a consequence 
of the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, was not without advantageous 
results in Australia. It made the governing authorities anxious to establish 
settlements in unoccupied territory, for fear that the French should plant 
colonies there. There are no facts to show that the French Government 
proposed annexing a portion of Australia.* But it was firmly believed that 
they contemplated such a policy ; and the belief was just as effectual in 
stimulating expansion as if positive evidence of aggression had been 
produced. 

Irnmediate ly afte r_t he depar ture of Eaudin's expedition from Port Ja ck- 
son, Governor King caused two settl ements to be planted in Tasma nia : 
at _Kisdon7qn the Derwent, in 1803, and at Port Dalrymple, on the Ta mar, 
in 1801. The same fear of French occupation led the British Government to 
send out Lieutej jjit^Calflngl -Collin-^ to cstabliah a colony at Port Phill ip in 
1^0 3. ColUns ^unfOrtunately. landed his 300 convicts on the sandv penin- 
sma which divides the port from the ocean, and, quite naturally , formed 
an unfavorab le opinlon~or~its suitab ilitv. Consequently, the fir st Port 
Phillip settlemen t failed, and Collins ' people were removed to t he_perwent. 
Lieutenant Tuckey, who wrote an account of the experiment, observed, on 
leaving the port which is now the seat of the great city of Melbourne, " the 
kangaroo seems to reign undisturbed lord of the soil, a dominion which, 
by the evacuation of Port Phillip, he is likely to retain for ages." That was 
109 years ago. 

There were other French scares long after Napoleon had ceased from 
troubling. In 1825, it was rumoured that a French settlement was to be 
attempted at Westernport. Governor Darling despatched H.M.S. Fly and 
two brigs conveying troops with instructions to establish themselves. It 
was found that French ships had called at Westernport, then quite unoccu- 
pied, but no attempt whatever had been made to found a colony there, 
and, the fear of rivalry subsiding, the British packed up their apparatus 
and returned to Sydney. 

A similar desire to frustrate foreign occupation in W ^tern Austra lia had 
more enduring consequences. The French were agaiTi sup^'6.^ed to be 
moving ; and in 1826 Major Lockyer, of the 39th regiment, was sent from 
Sydney in command of a detac fmient of troops and a party of conv icts to .1 
occupy King G eorge's Sound. ~This was the beginning of coloniziition iu 
the w e.s tern .'>fate ; and evenjwhen a m()n3_d^tminined,_att emp t was made to 
foliua a sfitlemen t upon the beautiful Swan Riv er, the British Government, 

•LorflJolin Ilus-i<;ll rucordi^l ( lifc/illnrlioni ami Su'ineKtiom. 1875, p. 20:5) that while lie was Colonial 
Secretary in the; Milbournr; GoviTnmcnt, 1m:{!)-4I, " A Vntleman attached to the French Govcriimoiit " 
called upon him and asked how much of Australia was claimed by Great Britain. He replied "the 
whole," and with that answer his visitor went away 






14 Federal Handbook. 



" being anxious to anticipate any such measure by France," offered land at 
the rate of one acre for every eighteen pence taken out in cash or goods bv 

^J- — immigrants. The fi xst Go\'^en iar-Q£-the- T v esile r n colony was Capt aiir SlirH ng. 

^ R J?^. T li u Knnrlinli prmTi £i tpr s of the <^r.] r.,-| Y - "' i mi'il | ] |i i i n ir r n ti n n nf j jTin 

personsin_tli£--fi-t^ t four years (1829~- 314r' ^^i*^h wiium a fair start wa& m ade, 

PprTK^hping phnspn as fhp ppntrp 

The instructions to Governor Phillip, when the first colony was estab- 
lished at Port Jackson, directed him to occupy Norfolk Island, which lies in 
the latitude of the Queensland border, about 900 miles from the east coast, 
to " prevent it being occupied by the subjects of any other European power." 
Within a month, therefore, of the founding of Sydney, Phillip despatched 
Lieutenant King with a small party of officers and convicts to form a settle- 
ment. Two years later, Phillip, confronted by famine conditions, sent 
nearly 300 convicts to Norfolk Island, and by 1793 there were over a thousand 
people there. Bi;.i-tli£_establish ment was costly, and when it was determined 
to colonize Tasmania, the Norfolk Islanders were transferred to the Tamar 



and__th£_Dej:went. It was again used as a convict establishment at later 
dates, and has had an exciting and romantic history, compounded of insur- 
rection, piracy, and shipwreck, as well as of curious phases of more peaceful 
colonizing. Many of the present inhabitants are descendants of Pitcairn 
Islanders, whose forefathers were associated with the famous Bounty 
mutiny. 

So uth Australia is theon]y_ime_af_Jdie_sixStates of Austral ia tha t had 
no direct conn"exioii _^IlEl£onvictism. Transportation, indeed, was expressly 
debarred in the constituting statute. The colony was originally established 
to carry out a theory. Edward Gibbon Wakefield, who spent three years in 
Newgate for abducting a ward in Chancery, had leisure there to meditate on 
problems of colonization. Though he had never been in Australia, he 
published in 1829 a little book directing attention to what he believed to 
be the defects of the system followed in New South Wales. His Letter from 
Sydney was so bright and clever that it was generally believed to be the 
result of observations made and impressions formed on the spot. It attracted 
all the more attention from the efforts then being exerted to settle Western 
Australia on a plan promulgated by Thomas Peel. AVakefield's main point 
was that it was a mistake in policy to grant land in a new colony in large areas 
on cheap terms, but that it should be sold at " a sufficient price," and the 
proceeds devoted to bringing out families of settlers. In 1830 the National 
Colonization Society was founded in London to carry out Wakefield's ideas, 
andJii_L ^4 Parliament, passp^ l an Act estab lishing t he colony of S outh Aus- 
tralia. A board of eight commissioners was appointed to manage affairs, 
^aKesident Commissioner being on the spot, and his colleagues remaining in 
London ; but the Crown also ap pointed a Governor, Sir John Hindmarsh. 
Eight vessels laden with immi grants arrived during 1836 at Kangaroo Island, 
wSere it" wasathrs ^proposed to locate "the colony. The place was deemed 
urisutEable, and Colonel Light7~the Surveyor-General, chose a site on the 
east side of St. Vincent's Gulf where the city of Adelaide has been built. 

The Wakefield theory did not work ; nor did the system of control. 
Hindmarsh quarrelled with the Resident Commissioner, and both were 
recalled. Colonel Gawler, who succeeded, plunged the settlement into 



History of Australia. 15 



financial embarrassments ; and it remained for the third Governor, George 
Grev (1841-5), to apply good sense and strong statesmanship to the situation, 
and to place South Australia upon a sound, stable, and progressive footing. 

Queensland was originally occupied as an ofishoot from Port Jackson. 
Governor Brisbane desired to relieve the pressure upon Sydney by extending 
settlement-. Lord Hobrfrt had said twenty years before, " if you continually 
send thieves to one place it must in time be supersaturated. Sydney now, 
I think, is completely saturated. We must let it rest and purify for a few 
years, till it begins to be in a condition again to receive." It had not been 
allowed to sweeten by rest, and Brisbane had instructed Oxley, the explorer, 
in 1822 to look for a good place for an overflow-settlement. Oxley cmisidered 
the shores of Moreton Bay offered an excellent situation ; andJii-l§24r-^e 
foun dations of the c ity of Brisba ne were laid. Th e Govej - iior inte nded that 
the new station shoiTld be reserved for offenders who committed crimes after 
tKanspOrtatioiTT '" Ac?cording "to the nature of the offence are they punished , ' ' 
he explained. " Those guilty of the leastar e sent to Port Macqua rig (on the 
west coast of Tasmania )Tthose ^of a "grave xjiatiite t o Moreton Bay^ _aiid-t]iose 
of the deepest dye t<) Norfolk Island.',' In 1819, when both Victoria and 
New~Sout"h Wales refused to receive any more "' exiles," they were sent on 
to Brisbane ; but transportation to this settlement ceased when the rest of 
eastern Australia was freed from it. 

The colonization of Victoria arose from totally different causes than those 
which operated in any other State. It has been shown that Tasmania and 
Queensland were chosen as fields for the extension of tne convict system, 
tha t sites in Western and South Australia were sel pptprl tn try the effi cacy 
of theories, and that a jealous fea r of French occu pation prompted early 
settlements m Tasmania, Western Australia, and Victoria! The two attempts 



made toTound colonies in the latter Stat^, in 1805~HTrd 1825, were total failures. 
When effective occupation did ensue, it occurred in quite a natural way. 
The explorations of Hume and Hovell, and of Mitchell, demonstrated that 
immense areas of valuable pasture land lay south of the Murray ; the Henty 
Brothers from Tasmania in 1836 settled at Portland, brought sheep and cattle 
with them, and commenced cultivation for the provisioning of their whaling 
boats ; and the news of the kind of country they had found induced other 
Tasmanians to follow. The Government did not promote occupation ; 
enterprising men sought out lands for their own advantage. There was no 
theoretical schenfie to test ; knowledge of good land and the pursuit of profit 
furnished the main motives. In May, 1835, John Batman, who had formed 
an association in Tasmania for the utilization of Port Phillip lands, sailed 
over and examined the country in the Geelong district. He was well satis- 
fied with what he saw. He took his boat up the bay, anchored at the mouth 
of the River Yarra, and set off on foot to explore. On this journey he fell 
in with aboriginals, and made with their chiefs the famous bargain by which 
he supposed himself to have purchased about 600,000 acres of land, including 
the whole of the present site of Melbourne, for a trifling yearly tribute and a 
present of IWankets, looking-glasses, knives, sci.ssors, and handkerchiefs. 
The Government naturally declined to ratify a " treaty " so made with 
savages who had not the faintest notion of what they were doing ; but there 
is every reason to believe that Batman acted in good faith. Tlio original 



1 



16 Federal Handbook. 



document, which is drawn up in what a high authority allows to be " English 
legal form," and purports to bear the " marks " of the chiefs, is still pre- 
served, and is one of the curiosities of the history of colonization. 

Batman had a rival in John Pascoe Fawkner, who came over from Tas- 
mania in August, 183-5, and whose activity did much to advance the progress 
of the little colony in its infant years. Earl^n 1836 many more pastoralists 
came over from Tasmania. In May of thai^^^yeag—there^eTfr~4:??— people 
livmg dn~t5e" s ite oOTelbourne, 31 of w ho m pet itioned Governor Sir Richard 
BbuJ^e-tn-senH nv^r^^una gistrate to reg ulatfi_a5airs^ In September, Bourke 
despatched Captain William Lonsdale to take charge. Batman had chosen 
the site for a " village " on the banks of the Yarra. Lonsdale confirmed the 
choice, and in March, 1837, that village received from Bourke, who paid a 
visit of inspection to it, the name of Melbourne. 

7. Progress of Settlement. 

A thorough study of the history of land settlement in Australia has not 
yet been made. The student who will some day undertake the task will 
have to master a bewildering complication of experiments, administrative and 
legislative, and will have to elucidate a baffling variety of devices, theories, 
ingenious means of defeating virtuous intentions, and frequent changes of 
policy to adapt the law to rapid changes in social structure. He will 
have to begin with a study of the very first principles affecting the rights 
of the Crown to control the disposition of unoccupied land. The theory that 
the Crown is the absolute owner of all land is described by an indubitable 
authority as " the driest of legal fictions, a fiction, moreover, which, unlike 
most legal fictions, never corresponded with fact."* Yet except for the 
practical application of this theory as a fundamental principle, the settlement 
of the colonies could not have been controlled. AVithout it, the first comers 
would have seized all the good land, and nothing short of revolution could 
have dispossessed them. " It may seem almost incredible," says the autho- 
rity cited, " that a question of such magnitude should be settled by the 
revival of a purely technical and antiquarian fiction." But if such a prin- 
ciple had not existed, in however shadowy a form, it would have been 
necessary to create one of the kind. Even as things occurred, many first- 
comers acquired enormous areas on such easy terms that the expansion of 
settlement has been hindered. 

T he earliest settlements ou t of Sydney were established on the Parra- 
maitta2_Jlaw^esburyj_an^^^t^^ RiVBTs: — Tfeese^wereTounded within 

the first ten years, when endeavours were being made j;o render Port Jackson 
self-supporting. The land grants made were comparatively small, and 
terms were easy both to free men and emancipists. AVhen the Blue Moun- 
tains were crossed in 1813, and the rich pastures beyond came within the 
scope of the settlers' enterprise, new problems arose. The prospect seemed 
boundless. There were millions and millions of acres stretching away to 
regions as yet unexplored. Governor Macquarie wished to restrain the 
limits of occupation, and would not make large grants. The British Govern- 
ment also considered that the dispersal of settlers over enormous stretches of 

* Jenks, HiHorii of Ihe Australasian Colonies, page 59. 



History of Australia. 17 

country unwise. But the rapid development of the wool industry after 
Macarthur introduced the Merino sheep and demonstrated the peculiar 
adaptability of Australia for the production of fine fleeces, impelled men to 
go far afield, where their flocks could multiply. Hence arose the squatting 
system. An owner of sheep would set out with his sheep and his drovers, 
and would " squat " upon an area of unoccupied land, which, being an 
experienced man, he would choose with skilful discernment. Then he 
would erect huts, would live there with his assistants, and would endeavour 
to make a fortune out of wool as rapidly as possible. The early squatters 
had no title to the land they occupied. They took it because it was available, 
and it was for the Government to deal with them as it pleased. Legally, 
by the application of the " legal fiction " above mentioned, they were tres- 
passers. Actually they were men of courage and enterprise, who made the 
best use then possible of laud which was lying idle. It remained for Governor 
Bourke, in 1836, to deal in a practical way with the problem created by 
extensive squatting. He divided the country which the squatters had occu- 
pied into pastoral districts, and issued grazing licences to occupiers for low 
fees. The licences created no ownership, but they gave the squatters security 
of tenure for defined areas, and for specified periods. 

It wasGn yprnnr Bnnrkp. , too, who first ( 1832) .adoptedr-the-faeasure o f 
appropriating pa rt of th e_pro'-'e pdg frnm fho mlo of 1nnd to bring immigrants 
to Australia fand this policy was in 1810 laid dow n t^ s a snnnrl onr^ hy a 
Jjtoard- of Co lonia l-^:aiid~ancl Jiimigration Commissioners^ appointed in Lond on 
to advise the Secretary of State. By this time, the advantages that Aus- 
tralia ofiere3rTo~agHciiTTurists~were becoming well recognised in Great Britain. 
The opening up of Port Phillip and the establishment of colonies in Sou th 
Australia and Western Australia likewise attracted~settlem ent. One pound 
per acre was stipulated as a common price for the sale of land to settlers. 
A good number of young men possessed of capital sought avenues for fortune 
in the new country, and many founded families which to-day are, as Hamlet 
said of Osric, " spacious in the possession of dirt." Dn^ng thp thirtips and 
th e early forties, the flow of immigration — amo unting to 10,000 persons per 
annum to New South Wales alone, in s ome years — effected a great chan ge 
in the general character of t he cou ntry. A p olicy of assisted immig ration 
hastened expansion. It was during this perio d that the re__g'TW up thst 
marked^aversion to the continuation ot convictism which h as alrea dy__b££n 
pointed out. The grovvtli ot the towns facilitated the consolidation and 
"wrrpliatic expression of opinion. The new-comers had changed their clime 
with a view to make homes for themselves and their posterity, and the 
spirit of nation-makers was within them. 

The process of parcelling out the land in large areas, principally for sheep- 
raising, continued till after the decline of the first prodigal gold yield, and the 
consequent diversion of the energies of some thousands of men from digging. 
Statesmen were now compelled to find means of settling farmers on smaller 
blocks. Cultivation on an extended scale became requisite. Hence arose 
a struggle with the powerful squatting interest which the conditions of pre- 
vious decades had created. The squatters did not want settlement. Tliey 
were satisfied with convictism. Indeed, the repre.sentations of the squatters, 
who needed labour for tlmir runs, were partly responsible for the creation 
C.i2ir)t IS 



\mx 



18 Federal Handbook. 



of the " conditional pardon system," for Gladstone, who was Secretary of 
State for the Colonies when the system was inaugurated, was a partner in 
a Victorian station property, and was well aware of the opinion of the large 
land-owners. Some— of— tbaig ^ spoke contemp tu^iisly--QL-ifee--iHrrnigration. 
" We urgently need labour, and would rather have the pick of the gaols than 
the refuse of workhouses,'^ said the squatters of Moreton Bay in a document 
in 1850. The free immigrants were not " the refuse of the workhouses," 
but they were largely farmers, and the squatters did not approve of the culti- 
vation of small areas. Eidicule was poured on the very idea of profitable 
cultivation in parts of the country — the Darling Downs for example — where 
to-day there are thousands of prosperous settlers. 

The methods employed to secure room for settlers have been various, 
and the enactments embodying them are much too complicated for exposi- 
tion within the limits of an historical summary. They began with the device 
of " selection before survey," under which a person desiring to settle and 
cultivate could enter upOn a "run" leased from the Crown by a squatter, 
mark off an area for himself, erect a dwelling upon it, and make it his own 
by paying £1 per acre for it by easy instalments. The system produced a 
crop of evils, and was not very effectual in attaining the object in view. 
It led, on the one hand^ to the " peacocking " of properties, often not for 
purposes of genuine occupation, but to induce the squatter to buy out the 
intruder — that is to say, it conduced to a species of blackmailing ; and, on 
the other hand, it led to " dummying," squatters arranging with persons 
acting in collusion with them to select the best parts of a leased run, and so 
keep out strangers. The Duffy Land Act, passed in Victoria in 1862, though 
designed to promote settlement, also led to the augmentation rather than the 
dividing of big estates. In the nineties the land settlement problem 
became more urgent. Improved methods of dairying, the development 
of a large butter export trade, the profitable extension of orchard 
culture, the application of machinery to wheat production — these factors, 
together with the desire of thousands of native-born farmers' sons to make 
homes for themselves, and the augmentation of the pressure of demand for 
land by immigrants, compelled new policies to be inaugurated. Governments, 
in order to settle a rural population, began to repurchase from owners at 
high prices large estates which had been acquired from the Crown at low 
prices. These areas were subdivided and re-sold to farmers on easy terms. 
A more radical method of attaining the same end was a tax on the unimproved 
value of land, passed by the Federal Parliament, 1910. The tax, though 
an important revenue-producing agency, was primarily designed to compel 
large land-owners either to sell or to put their holdings to the most productive 
use. 

One of the beneficent results of Australian settlement, not only to this 
country, but to the colonization generally, was the devising of a cheap and 
simple system of land transfer. The Torrens Act was passed by the South 
Australian Parliament in 1858. Its author, Eobert Torrens, was not a lawyer, 
and his efforts were discouraged by the profession, whose members clung 
fondly to the old complicated system which required each transfer of real 
property to be accompanied by title deeds recapitulating the previous owners. 
Torrens devised the method of registration of lands in a public office, where 



History of Australia. 19 



the ownership of any piece of property could be determined at a glance. 
His scheme met with ridicule and strenuous opposition. Experienced 
lawyers declared it to be unworkable.' But the Real Property Act of Torrens 
was carried, and he was appointed to superintend its working. It proved to 
be so safe and successful in South Australia that the other colonies soon 
adopted it ; and the distinguished French historian of modern colonization, 
Leroy-Beaulieu, declares that a system of the kind is essential to the 
well-being of any colony.* 

Two facts stand out, in connexion with the extension of settlement in 
recent years. One is the appreciation of the importance of irrigation in 
Australian development. The second is the discovery of means of profitably 
utilizing lands which were long considered to be of little or no cultivable 
value. Vast areas in South Australia and Victoria, once believed to be 
beyond subjugation by the plough, are now yielding millions of bushels of 
wheat per annum. American " dry farming " methods have been adapted 
to Australian conditions with eminently successful results. Only lately have 
the possibilities of irrigation been appreciated, and the country is hardly 
more than at the beginning of a new era in this regard. Mr. Deakin, in the 
late eighties, inaugurated an irrigation policy in Victoria, and it stands to the 
credit of his statesmanship that he saw, and strove to make his countrymen 
lealize, the importance of the scientific application of water to the soil. 
When Mr. Deakin travelled in the irrigated areas of America and India, 
wrote his Irrigated India, and inaugurated his policy, farmers were not quick 
to remodel their methods. But a new generation, taught by zealous experts, 
shows a livelier sense of what is to be gained by the co-operation of the 
irrigation engineer. 

8. The Gold Discoveries. 

The great era of gold discovery in Australia dates from 1851, but nearly 
twenty years before that time particles had been found in the neighbourhood 
of Bathurst. In 1839, Count Strzelecki detected traces of gold amongst 
decomposed iron ore. and informed Governor Gipps, who was not gratified 
by the news, thinking that if it became generally known the difficulty of 
restraining the convict population would be great. But when Strzelecki 
reached England, his geological specimens and maps were examined by Sir 
Roderick Murchison, who, in a paper read before the Royal Geological 
Society, pointed out the resemblance between the mountain region where the 
Polish count had travelled, and the gold-bearing Ural mountains. Murchison 
even wrote to the Secretary of State, Earl Grey, predicting that valuable finds 
of gold would be made in Australia ; but no notice was taken of his letter. In 
1848, a man named Smith found a nugget embedded in quartz near Berrima, 
in the Blue Mountains, but the Government would not follow up the dis- 
covery, for fear " of agitating the public mind by ordering geological 
investigations." 

Just as an analogy with the Urals impelled Sir Roderick Murchison to 
prophesy, so a resemblance between Australian conditions and those of the 
Californian gold-fields convinced Edward Hargreaves that gold would be 

* Leroy-Beaulk'U, /Je/a 6'c;to»'i«rj«ion cluz leu PeujiUii Modenics, II , 5 «), wlicrn particular iittont inn is 
(l>v.)ted to tho subject. 



20 Federal Handbook. 



found in the Bathurst district of New South Wales. He had been a squatter 
there, and had gone to California to seek fortune when the news of the gold 
discoveries came in 1849. He soon convinced himself that the country with 
which he had been familiar in Australia was so like that which he saw in 
America that it ought to be similarly auriferous ; and he returned in 1850 
to investigate. His reasoning was justified. He washed gravel in the bed 
of the Summerhill Creek, and found a small nugget at the first trial. Each 
succeeding dish of earth dug out produced gold. When Hargreaves returned 
to Sydney and disclosed his news to the Government, the exciting gold-rushes 
of the fifties commenced, and Australia entered upon a new phase of her 
history. 

There was at the same time a belief that gold would be found in rich 
quantities in Victoria. As early as 18-19., a shepherd youth named Chapman 
sold 22 ounces in Melbourne. He had found it in a gully in the hills of the 
western half of the colony, while looking after his sheep. Other bushmen 
occasionally brought small quantities of gold into the city, and there was a 
general expectation that important discoveries would be made. When the 
success of Hargreaves north of the Murray became known in Melbourne, 
interest in the subject quickened, and a reward was offered to any person 
who should be the means of making known a gold mine within 200 miles of 
the city. Valuable finds were made in several parts of the country at about 
the same time ; but the sensational development — that which was noised 
all over the world, and attracted thousands of the young and enterprising 
of all nations — ^was Hiscocks' discovery of gold at Buninyong, Ballarat, in 
August, 1851. Immediately after, in the same gully, a party of men washed 
out 4| ounces from the surface earth in two hours, and on the following day 
obtained 30 ounces. Startling successes of this kind soon became common, 
and fabulous fortunes seemed to be within the grasp of those who could 
strike a good patch. The fame of Ballarat became world-wide. Ibsen, 
writing his poetical play Love's Comedy, in Norway, used the name in an 
image for vaulting ambition : an end " worth the leaping for " was " a 
Ballarat bavoad the desert sands." 

Many fortunes were made ; many startling finds occurred. Dr. Kerr, 
guided by an aboriginal employe, found a huge block of gold weighing a 
hundredweight, embedded in a mass of quartz, on the Meroo Creek, in the 
Bathurst district. It was worth about £4,000. A Melbourne publican 
found a nugget weighing 7 lbs. while amusing himself by poking about with 
a pick at Black Hill. A ship's captain and seven sailors who tramped to 
Ballarat from Melbourne obtained nearly £3,500 worth of gold in three weeks , 
after which they went back to their ship and sailed in her home to England. 
In Canadian Gully, Ballarat, sLx nuggets were found in two months weighing 
in the aggregate about 390 lbs. Of Bendigo, a digger wrote, " You could 
see the gold shining in the heaps of dirt, and every man sat on his heap all 
night with a pistol or some weapon in his hand." It was a glittering period ; 
yet a thoughtful Australian statesman, the late Sir Henry Wrixon, on one 
occasion ventured the opinion that on the whole the Australian gold-fields 
had doubtfully been of economic advantage to the country. He argued 
that the capital and energy put into gold mining had probably exceeded the 
value of the product, and that the same capital and energy applied to other 



History op Australia. 21 

industries would have yielded a larger return. An historian whose opinions 
are always well weighed expresses the same view : " It is doubtful whether, 
on the whole, the gold mining industry was in itself profitable, whether as 
much money has not been spent, in the aggregate, on winning the gold, as 
has been made out of the yield."* There is probably much truth in the 
point ; but, on the other hand, the gold-fields served Australia well in attract- 
ing to the country many thousands of men in the prime of life, a large pro- 
portion of whom remained. The political consequences were also, as pointed 
out below, of very great importance. 

Much has been written of the wUd life of the diggings, and some of the 
fiction intended to illustrate it is probably no more highly coloured than is 
justified by the facts. Stories like Rolf Boldrewood's Miner's Right and 
Nevermore, by an author who lived through the events whereof he writes, 
are full of the real atmosphere of a turbulent time. The administrative 
difficulties were so novel, the influx of population was so large, that authority 
was not a little bewildered. One serious struggle between law and disorder 
occurred. There was a threat of riot on the Turon, and an outbreak of bush- 
ranging originated from the presence of so many ex-convicts amongst so many 
opportunities for plunder. But the mass of the diggers were orderly, 
industrious men, whose inclination was to co-operate in maintaining good 
government. The tactless handling of questions at issue, rather than a 
lawless disposition on the part of the miners, produced the Eureka Stockade 
incident. 

There was nothing unreasonable in the imposition by the Government 
of Victoria of a tax on the gold produced. The expenses of administration 
had to be defrayed from some source, and the many thousands of pounds 
worth of gold being obtained constituted a fund upon which Latrobe, the 
Lieutenant-Governor, deemed it equitable to levy. But the method chosen 
was unfortunate, and the means of collection proved to be irritating as a 
rule, and grossly unjust in many instances. Latrobe would have preferred 
a tax on gold exported. That would have ensured that only the successful 
diggers would pay, and that they would be taxed according to their good 
fortune. But his Legislative Council was not favorable to this mode, and the 
example of New South Wales was followed, in the imposition (1851) of a 
licence-fee of 30s. per month on every miner. It was inequitable, because 
it hit the miner with a poor claim as hard as the man who was obtaining 
plenty of gold. But it was made an instrument of gross tyranny in operation. 
A person could be arrested at the instance of an informer, if found upon 
the diggings without a licence actually in his possession, and the fact that 
the informer was entitled to one-half the penalty recovered, which might 
be £.5 for a first offence., conduced to the arrest of wholly innocent persons, 
who had no direct connexion with mining, and to the constant irritation, 
and even persecution, of properly licensed men. Moreover, the miners 
protested that they had no representation in the Legislative Council, and 
that taxation without representation was un -British. 

Latrobe, severely harassed by inadequate revenues, proposed to increase 
the licence-fee to £3 per month, but the outcry was so strong that he desisted. 

* .Jose, History of Auslralaaia, page 2.'J2. 



22 Federal Handbook. 



In 1853 it was reduced to £1 per month, but the evils of the system of 
collection were not amended. In 1854 Sir Charles Hotham succeeded to the 
charge of the Government of Victoria, and the mining population hoped for 
reform. But they were severely disappointed. Hotham, faced by increasing 
gold-fields expenditure, and a depleted treasury, assumed a stiff attitude, 
and ordered the police to prosecute the collection of licence-fees with greater 
diligence. The extremely harsh conduct of the police, and the gravely 
•defective administration of justice, aggravated the prevalent discontent. 
At Ballarat, the intense feeling was brushed up to a crisis by a riot which 
occurred in October, 1854, about the murder of a miner named Scobie, at 
an hotel of ill-repute, kept by one Bentley, an ex-convict. The latter 
was accused of the crime, but was acquitted at the instance of the magistrate, 
Dewes. There was good reason for suspecting the good faith of Dewes, 
and public indignation was strong. A public meeting was held, and while 
it was in progress a detachment of police was sent to protect Bentley's hotel. 
It was believed that the police intended to disperse the meeting. At once 
the anger of the crowd, about 8,000 strong, was directed against the very 
unpopular constabulary. Some stones were thrown, the windows of the 
hotel were smashed, and finally a fire was set to the building, and it was burnt 
to the ground. Three men were arrested, and the diggers subscribed bail 
money for them. Meanwhile a strong agitation against the licence-fees and 
the police policy was maintained. The movement was connected with that for 
the release of the alleged rioters and with the insistent demand of " no taxation 
without representation." The Eeform League which was formed promoted 
a meeting at which licences were publicly burnt. On 28th November, a 
military detachment sent up from Melbourne was attacked on the road, 
when several troopers were wounded and a drummer boy killed. Some of the 
leaders of the league were foreigners ; many were fire-brands, who talked 
wildly of upsetting the Government and establishing a republic. They even 
produced a flag, bearing the device of the Southern Cross on a blue ground, 
which was to float over the seat of the new order they intended to establish. 
They constructed a stockade flanking the road to Melbourne, about a mile 
from Ballarat, intending by its means to block the advance of more troops 
who were understood to be on their way up. 

These preparations were rudely shattered by the prompt action of Captain 
Thomas, of the 40th regiment, who was in command of the military already 
on the field. On the morning of 3rd December he led an assault upon the 
stockade, attacking it from the rear with a force of not quite 300 troops and 
police. In about twenty minutes after his bugle rang out for the assault the 
" rebellion " was suppressed. An officer was killed, together with four 
privates, and about a dozen of the storming party were wounded. On the 
other side, fully 30 were killed, many were wounded, and about 130 prisoners 
were taken. Only one " rebel " was convicted, and he was the editor of the 
Ballarat Times, but he was liberated on his own recognisances. A negro 
was tried for treason and acquitted ; and the Crown did not succeed in securing 
a conviction in any case. Peter Lalor, one of the ringleaders, afterwards 
(1880) became Speaker of the Victorian Legislative Assembly, and was a 
conspicuously able and conscientious man. The stockade incident effectually 
cleared the air, and brought about reforms which enabled gold mining to be 



History of Australia. 23 



conducted henceforth as an ordinary peaceful industry. It forms a dramatic 
climax to the roaring digging days.* 

Every State has had its gold rushes, but the opportunities for the making 
of many fortunes by men with little capital have never been so plentiful as 
in New South Wales and Victoria in the fifties. In Queensland, the most 
important discovery was the Mount Morgan mine, which made its purchasers 
millionaires. It was bought for £640 in 1886, and yielded £4,500,000 in ten 
years. In Western Australia the Kimberley Gold-field was opened up in 
1887, and in the early nineties came the amazing discoveries of the Coolgardie 
and Kalgoorlie district. Large cities sprang up where once had been desert, 
and an enormous influx of male population completely changed the political 
complexion of the country. The great silver mines of Broken Hill also made 
huge fortunes for their proprietors. An example is that of Mr. George 
McCuUoch, who was a sheep-farmer in the neighbourhood of the hill, which 
was found to be a mass of ore. He was one of the original owners, and with 
the great fortune amassed from the mines became a prominent collector of 
works of art in England. He died in 1908. Scarcely less important than the 
mines of precious metals have been the copper mines of the Burra (South 
Australia) and Mount Lyell (Tasmania), and the tin mines of Mount BischofJ. 
Coal mining, dating from the last years of the eighteenth century in New 
South Wales, is now extended to Victoria, Queensland, and Western 
Australia. 

9. Constitutional Government. 

It was inevitable that political tendencies in Australia should develop 
in a democratic direction ; but the particular impetus given to the movement 
was afTected in an important degree by the character of the population that 
flocked to the gold-fields in the fifties. Just before the great discoveries 
were made at Ballarat, Bendigo, on the Turon, and elsewhere, Europe had been 
saething with political discontent. The Chartist movement in England 
apparently collapsed in 1848, but the reforms demanded by the Chartists 
were still advocated by radical thinkers. The Irish evictions of 1847 and 
Smith O'Brien's " rebellion " of 1848 caused thousands of Irishmen to emi- 
grate. The French Revolution of 1848, which overturned the Orleans 
monarchy, was flushed with the socialistic ideas of Louis Blanc. There 
were rervolutionary outbreaks in Germany, a conference of Liberal leaders at 
Heidelberg demanded popular reforms, riots in Berlin frightened Frederich 
William IV., and a Radical party was clamorous in the Vorparlament of 
Frankfort. There was insurrection and a demand for manhood suffrage in 
Austria, the ideas of Mazzini evoked a national and democratic movement in 
Italy, and the same spirit was strongly manifested in Switzerland and Poland. 
The gold-fields populations of Australia were extraordinarily cosmopolitan ; 
and, from whatever country the immigrants came, their political opinions 
were bound to be coloured by the movements of 1848. Many were political 
refugees ; thousands shared the convictions of the English Chartists. 

• 'I'he Eureka Stockailc; incident is still rotjardej, especially by those connected witli mining, as a 
phase in a stnmyle for liberty, and the association of a relative with it is considered a matter of pride. 
Thus, on 2nd Oitober, ] 91 ;i, we find Si^nator Bakhaj) (Tasmania), In a speech in the Senate (Commonwealth 
ParlinniPnUiry JJebates, I'Ji:}, p. ITM) making it a proud boast that " I have a claim, by virtue of blood 
and lineal descent, to speak feelintily in recard to fl'.'htinc for the <lefence of the liberties of Australia. 
A very close maternal relative of mine was the very first man to be killed at the fluht at Kureka 
Stockade." 



24 Federal Handbook. 



Now, the demand for constitutional government in Australia was not 
in itself necessarily of an ultra-democratic character. The most prominent 
name in the history of the movement is that of W. C. Wentworth, and he 
expressly disclaimed any leanings in the direction of democracy. The 
report of the Legislative Council of New South Wales drafted by him in 1854 
declared that the advocates of constitutional government had " no wish to 
sow the seeds of a future democracy." What they desired was the establish- 
ment in Australia of such free institutions as are most characteristic of British 
principles of government^ — trial by jury, no taxation without representation, 
freedom of the press, and so forth. There was even a proposition to form an 
hereditary order of Australian baronets who should be in the Legislative 
Councils very much what peers are in the House of Lords in England : a 
disaster from which the country was happily saved by sanity and a sense 
of humour. 

Li the beginning the government of Australia was autocratic. The rule 
of the early administrators was subject only to the rather slack supervision 
of the Secretary of State. A Governor might consult his principal officials 
on matters of polic}^ affecting their departments, but he need not. After 
about 1820, personal rule was modified. Governors were expected to take 
counsel with their officers. In 1825, a Legislative Council was established 
to assist in the making of ordinances. Its members were appointed by the 
Colonial Office ; but it was not permitted to enforce any ordinance unless 
the Chief Justice certified that it was consistent with the laws of England 
" so far as the circumstances of the Colony will admit." The powers and 
size of the Council were extended in 1828, when the veto of the Governor 
and the Chief Justice were removed, and financial control was intrusted to 
it. In 1842, a decisive step forward was taken, when a Legislative Council 
was established consisting of 36 members, only twelve of whom were nomi- 
nated by the Crown, the remainder being elected by those of the people who 
held fi'eehold estate to the value of £200 or occupied premises with a rental 
of over £20 per annum. The Port Phillip District — for the separate Colony 
of Victoria had not yet been formed — was represented by six members upon 
this Council. Wentworth was also an elected member of it, and Robert 
Lowe was a nominated member — the Robert Lowe who was afterwards 
(1868) to become Chancellor of the Exchequer in the first Gladstone Cabinet 
and the Lord Sherbrooke of later days. 

The Constitution of 1842 provided a satisfactory system of government 
for the time, and enabled public opinion to be fairly well represented. Tas- 
mania (still known as Van Diemen's Land) had since 1823 been governed by 
a Lieutenant-Governor with a nominated Legislative Council of its own, 
and a similar system was in operation in South Australia and Western 
Australia. 

Evidence that this method of government was being outgrown became 
apparent when a demand for separation grew in Port PhiUip. Dissatisfaction 
arose from the spending of the proceeds of Port Phillip lands outside the dis- 
trict. The rapid growth of Melbourne, and the inconvenience of having 
affairs regulated from a centre 600 miles away, at a time when there was, of 
course, no railway connexion, gave impetus to the movement. 



History of Australia. 25 

In order to call attention to the situation in a striking way, the Melbourne 
people in 1848 elected Earl Grey, the Secretary of State, as one of their 
representatives on the Council. The move was more than a jest. It was 
intended to stir the British Government to grant separation ; and it succeeded. 
In 1850 a new Australian Government Act was passed ; and on 1st July, 
1851, Victoria was proclaimed a separate Colony. The name was recom- 
mended by the Committee appointed by the Secretary of State for the con- 
sideration of matters " relating to trade and foreign plantations," in 1849, 
and who advised the Queen to " be graciously pleased to confer the name of 
Victoria " on the new province. Both its northern boundary, the line of 
the Murray, and its western boundary, dividing it from South Australia, 
have since been the subject of dispute, and, in the latter instance, of a law- 
suit. Under the new Act, the system of government which had for eight 
years prevailed in New South Wales was extended to Victoria, South Aus- 
tralia, and Tasmania. It is interesting to notice that, just as Robert Lowe 
was a member of the first Council in New South Wales, so H. C. E. Childers 
became a member of the first Victorian Council ; both, at later dates, having 
been Chancellors of the Exchequer in England. Queensland did not become 
a separate Colony till 1859, when the form of government had been altered. 
Western Australia remained under the rule of a Governor and a Council of 
ten, none of them elected, till 1870, when the Council was enlarged. In 
1890 responsible government was instituted. 

A section of the Act of 1850 enabled the Legislative Councils of the Colonies 
to frame new Constitutions, which were not to be put in operation till the 
assent of the Imperial Government had been obtained. Public opinion 
on political concerns ripened very rapidly as the gold-lure attracted popula- 
tion, the towns grew, and newspapers were established. Political issues 
were keenly debated. Constitutional questions were discussed. People 
thought that the time had come to discard the old Legislative Council method, 
and to set up Parliaments modelled on the British pattern. Thus by 1854 
the four Colonies had devised new Constitutions for themselves. Each Colony 
chose to have a Legislature consisting of two Houses. With respect to the 
Lower House, the Legislative Assembly, South Australia gave the franchise 
to every male over the age of 21 whose name had been six months on an 
electoral roll. New South Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania stipulated a small 
property qualification. The constitution of the Upper Houses, or Legislative 
Councils, differed very much. New South Wales preferred a nominee Coun- 
cil. Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania chose to have elected Councils, 
insisting, however, on a relatively high property or educational or professional 
qualification. The Councils to-day remain substantially as they were con- 
stituted over half-a-century ago, except in the case of Victoria, where there 
has been a reduction of the property qualification of members. Queensland 
has followed the lead of New South Wales in having a nominee Council, but 
Western Australia decided for an elected body. To-day, payment of members 
of Legislative Assemblies prevails in all States ; women are enfranchised in 
all States ; the normal duration of a Legislative Assembly is three years in 
all States. The Executive in all States is framed on the British model. It is 
responsible to the Lower House of the Legislature, wliich, also, has paramount 
authority in matters of finance. 



•26 Federal Handbook. 



The working of representative government in Australia has conduced 
to some peculiarly interesting crises. . There was a dead-lock between the two 
Houses of the Legislature in New South Wales in 1861. The Government 
of the day succeeded in passing through the Legislative Assembly a Land 
Bill intended to promote the acquisition of farms by men of small means. 
The squatters, who were powerful in the Legislative Council, did not favour 
the proposal. They rejected the BUI. The Premier, Mr. Charles Cowper, 
thereupon advised the Governor, Sir John Yoimg, to appoint 21 new members 
to the Council. It was the device threatened in England in 1911 to overcome 
the reluctance of the House of Lords to pass the Parliament Bill. The 
Governor accepted the advice, and 21 supporters of the Land Bill were 
appointed. But when they attended to be sworn in, the President 
of the Council and a majority of the members rose from their seats 
and walked out, so that the sitting lapsed. A little later Wentworth 
— who had been in England — accepted the Presidency, a new Council 
was appointed, and the Bill was passed. It was the measure which 
introduced the " selection before survey " system. Sir John Young was 
blamed by the Colonial Office for appointing the " swamping " 21 
councillors. 

A crisis of extraordinary bitterness occurred in Victoria in 186-5. A 
strong protectionist party had grown up, largely in consequence of the 
advocacy of David Syme and the Age newspaper. A Government headed by 
James McCulloch introduced a protective Tariff, which was passed by the 
Legislative Assembly. The Council, as was well-known, intended to reject 
the measure. Being an elected body, it was impossible to secure a majority 
by nominating fresh members. But the Council could not, under the Con- 
stitution, amend an Appropriation Bill. McCulloch therefore resorted to the 
expedient of " tacking " the Tariff on to the Bill providing for the ordinary 
annual services of government. The Council had either to accept the whole 
Bill, including the nauseous Tariff, or reject it, and thereby deprive the 
Government of the means of paying the salaries of the public service, 
the accounts of contractors, and other obligations awaiting discharge. 
The Council accepted the challenge and rejected the Bill. McCulloch, fertile 
in devices, went on collecting revenue under a Tariff which Parliament had 
not passed, borrowed money from the London Bank of Australia for meeting 
the immediate needs of the Government, and arranged with the bank to sue 
for the amount. Judgment was allowed to go without dispute, whereupon 
the Governor, Sir Charles Darling, issued a warrant for the payment of the 
money out of the revenue. This devious method was followed for four 
months, when McCulloch, to relieve the situation, persuaded the Assembly 
to send up a Tariff Bill to the Council free from " tacking" to an Appropria- 
tion Bill. But the Council rejected the measure even in this form. After a 
general election, which returned a powerful protectionist majority to the 
Lower House, they rejected it again. The Assembly pledged itself to support 
no Ministry that did not put forward a protectionist Tariff, and again 
there was a dead-lock. This time the Council gave way. The Tariff was 
sent up for the fourth time, there was a conference between the two Houses, 
a few concessions were made, and the protective policy became statutory 
in April, 1866. 



History of Australia. 27 



Immediately afterwards another crisis arose. Sir Charles Darling was recalled 
by the Colonial Office on account of the part he had played in the events 
just chronicled. The Legislative Assembly, holding that he had acted con- 
stitutionally in follow^ing the advice of his Ministers, voted a grant of £20,000 
to Lady Darling, and an address to Sir Charles thanking him for his services. 
The Council rejected the grant proposed. A dissolution ensued, and McCul- 
loch's party was returned by an overwhelming majority. But the new 
Governor, Manners-Sutton, acting on instructions from the Colonial Office, 
sought to impede the carrying out of the will of the popular party, and a 
period of excitement and complication followed, the like of which has no 
parallel in Australian history. The Governor kept in office a Ministry which 
had no majority in Parliament, and which could not even obtain supply. 
The extraordinary situation was ended by the Colonial Office deciding to 
grant Darling a pension of £1,000 a year, and by the intimation that in these 
circumstances Lady Darling could not accept the £20,000 which the 
Legislative Assembly desired to vote for her. 

Yet another constitutional crisis occurred in Victoria in 1877, over the 
question of the payment of members of Parliament. The Government of 
Graham Berry secured the passage of a Bill by the Assembly, but the Council 
rejected it. Thereupon the measure w^as " tacked " to the Appropriation 
Bill, which was laid aside by the Council. Berry dealt with the situation 
resolutely. Deprived of legal means of financing the operations of govern- 
ment, he dismissed hundreds of public servants. The Governor, Sir George 
Bowen, acting on the advice of Ministers, signed warrants enabling revenue 
to be expended without parliamentary sanction. Finally the Council yielded 
to the force of public opinion, and passed the Payment of Members Bill, 
which was sent up apart from the Appropriation Bill. Berry also induced 
the Council to pass a measure reforming itself, reducing the property quali- 
fication of its members from £-5,000 to one of a clear annual value of £100, 
and the term of service from ten years to six. 

The memory of these prolonged and bitter struggles between branches 
of the Legislature was carefully regarded when the Commonwealth Constitu- 
tion was being drafted ; and provisions were expressly inserted therein for 
the prevention of " tacking," and prescribing a course of procedure to remedy 
dead-locks. There have been difficulties in other States than Victoria ; 
in South Australia disputes have frequently occurred ; but the instances 
described above are the " sad exemplars " of a Constitution strained to 
breaking point by a clashing of powers. 

10, The Achievement of Federation. 

Even at the time when separatist tendencies were most marked in Aus- 
tralian affairs, thoughtful men foresaw that a time would come when cohesive 
forces would assert themselves. The Committee on Trade and Foreign Plan- 
tations, which reported to the Queen in 1849 — Sir J. Stephen drafted the 
report — although recommending that the wishes of the Colonies respecting 
separate Governments should be carried out, nevertheless recommended that 
there should be a coiiinion Tariif. " So great indeed would be the evil, 
and such the obstruction of the inter-colonial trade, and so great the check 



28 Federal Handbook. 



to the development of the resources of each of these Colonies," from the 
operation of separate Tarifis, " that it seems to us necessary that there should 
be one Tariff common to them all, so that goods might be carried from the one 
into the other with the same absolute freedom as between any two adjacent 
counties in England." The Committee recommended further that there 
should be established a House of Delegates elected by the legislatures of the 
different Colonies, with power to make laws of general application on ten 
subjects, namely : duties on imports and exports ; postal affairs ; roads, 
canals, and railways ; beacons and lighthouses ; shipping dues ; weights 
and measures ; the establishment of a general Supreme Court of original 
jurisdiction and appeal ; the determining of the jurisdiction, forms, and 
manner of proceeding of such Court ; the enactment of laws affecting all 
the Colonies on any subject not specified in the preceding list but on which 
the House of Delegates should be desired by the separate Legislatures to 
legislate ; and the appropriation of revenue for the objects enumerated. 

It will be seen that this was a scheme of federation, formulated half-a- 
century before the Colonies themselves agreed upon a basis of union. The 
most important omission from it is a provision for common defence, but it 
must be remembered that at the time when the Committee deliberated British 
troops were stationed in Australia, and the power of the Colonies to make 
adequate provision for their own defence was hardly contemplated* But 
the Act of Parliament passed in 1850 did not embody the Committee's scheme, 
though the title of Governor-General was conferred upon the Governor of 
New South Wales, and was borne by him until 1861. 

The six Colonies of Australia, then, went on their own way. They had 
their separate Governors, Governments, and Parliaments. They legislated 
for their own internal requirements, without regard to the neighbours 
across their borders. They imposed Tariffs which operated against the 
goods of fellow Australians precisely as they operated against foreigners. 
A pair of boots imported to South Australia from Victoria paid just as much 
duty as a pair of boots imported from France or America. Not only were 
manufactured goods taxed. Victoria imposed a stock tax in the interests 
of graziers, so that even in a time of scarcity cattle brought over the border 
from New South Wales was taxed at so much per head. A Victorian states- 
men. Sir James Patterson, coined the phrase " the barbarism of borderism," 
but the system was maintained. 

Meanwhile, the ripening of political thought in the direction of federation 
was accelerated by extra-political forces. Railways and telegraphs ab- 
breviated space and time, linked together previously isolated communities, 
made commercial intercourse facile, and emphasized the inconvenience of 
hindrances to its fluidity. It was not till 1883 that railway communication 
between Melbourne and Sydney was established ; not till 1887 that Adelaide 
was connected by rail with Melbourne ; not till 1889 that Sydney and Bris- 
bane were joined. A line giving southern and eastern Australia access to 
Perth in the extreme west is only now in process of construction. The 
telegraph assisted materially in the unifying process. In 1872 a work of 
magnitude was achieved when the overland line from Adelaide to Port 
Darwin was completed. By 1877 there was telegraphic connexion 
between all the State capitals. 



History op Australia. 29 



The ineffectiveness of the separate Colonies for dealing with questions 
affecting Australia as a whole likewise impelled thoughtful men to consider 
the necessity for union. Australians are of European, chiefly British, origin, 
and have kinship with the people of North America ; but their continent 
is neighboured by thickly-populated Asiatic countries, whose customs and 
standards of living are alien from those prevailing here. Soon after the 
establishment of representative government, New South AVales, Victoria, 
and South Australia found it desirable to legislate to exclude Chinese immi- 
gration. More stringent laws were passed in the eighties. But still it was 
felt that Australia required to act on this question through a strong central 
authority. The employment of South Sea islanders (Kanakas) on the sugar 
plantations of Queensland introduced another alien element deemed socially 
undesirable, and if the traffic was to cease, Queensland must have a free 
extended market for her sugar, and the industry must be an Australian 
concern. 

Again, the defensive organization of the country was weak and inefficient 
as long as each of six States had its own little force, and acted without co- 
operation with its neighbours. There were also questions vitally affecting 
the future well-being of the country upon which it was desirable that Aus- 
tralia should speak authoritatively. One such occurred when Bismarck 
inaugurated a German colonial policy. There were grounds for believing 
that Germany intended to appropriate New Guinea. That territory lay so 
near to the northern shores of Australia that the prospect caused some 
excitement. The Queensland Premier, Mcllwraith (1883), telegraphed to 
London urging the Imperial Government to annex New Guinea, and offering 
to bear the cost of administration if that were done. New South Wales, 
Victoria, and South Australia agreed to co-operate. While Lord Derby, 
the Colonial Secretary, delayed, Mcllwraith acted. News of a German 
move came to hand, whereupon the Queensland Government sent up a 
force to take possession of the southern part of New Guinea and to hoist 
the British flag at Port Moresby (April, 1883). It was an audacious 
stroke, but it succeeded. The Imperial Government could not, in the face 
of strongly expressed Australian opinion, do more than disavow respon- 
sibility. In the following year Germany did annex northern New Guinea, 
which was named Kaiser Wilhelm's Land, and also marked out for herself a 
sphere of possession and influence in the Pacific. The raising of this 
question was of great value in enlarging the Australian political horizon, in 
making people realize that the well-being — the security even — of their own 
separate Colonies, in whose domestic affairs they had been so engrossed, 
was affected by considerations of which they had been too negligent. 
Questions relating to the French in the Pacific began to engage serious 
attention. But how could six Colonies acting separately speak decisively 
on such matters of world politics as these ? 

A move in the direction of union was made in 1885, when a Federal Council 
was established. It had no legislative authority and no source of revenue. 
It could draw up statutes on a few specified subjects, but had no power to 
enforce them. It was still more ineffective because New South Wales 
did not participate in its deliberations. Still, the Council did afford a means 
of ventilating periodically questions affecting Australia as a whole, and its 



30 Federal Handbook. 



proceedings were always watched w^ith interest. Abortive attempts to frame 
an acceptable Federal Constitution were made at Conferences held in 1890 
and 1891. The provisions of the draft instrument of union prepared at the 
latter Convention were discussed far and wide, and were of the utmost value 
in crystalizing opinion, not only on points on which federation was desirable, 
but also on the hindrances to the achievement of it. There was an interval 
of a few years, during which the question matured in the public mind. 
Societies discussed it ; leagues were formed to advocate the cause ; public 
men pronounced on important phases of it ; the e was a considerable pamphlet 
literature. An extra-official Conference at Corowa gathered up the threads 
and formulated a practical plan of procedure. At length, in 1895-6, the 
movement brought federation within the range of practical politics. The 
Parliaments of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania 
passed Acts enabling a Convention to be elected by the people to prepare a 
Federal Constitution. The Western Australian Parliament did not trust 
the people of the State, but elected delegates itself. Queensland, for the time 
being, did not participate. The Convention held three sessions in 1897-8, 
and finally brought forth a Bill. The measure was almost at once accepted 
by the people of three States by referendum; but certain of its provisions 
created dissatisfaction in New South Wales, and had to be amended at a 
Conference of Premiers before it was made acceptable to that State. One 
of the amendments made insured the establishment of the federal capital 
in New South Wales, but with the condition that it should not be within 
100 miles of Sydney. In its amended form the Bill was accepted by the 
people of five States, and the sixth (Queensland), which had not been repre- 
sented at the Convention, determined to enter the Union. The Imperial 
Parliament made an amendment of some consequence, ensuring the right of 
Australian litigants to appeal from the High Court to the Privy Council, 
except in cas s affecting the constitutior.al powers of the Commonwealth or 
of States. But at length, in July, 1900, Queen Victoria gave her assent 
to the Act establishing a Government and Parliament for the Common- 
wealth of Australia, and in 1901 the present King — then Duke of York — 
formally opened the first Parliament, and set the machinery of the new 
Government in motion. 

It is not possible within the space prescribed to relate the history of 
Australia under Federation. The thirteen years have been crowded with 
incident, and have witnessed remarkable changes in political complexion. 
They have witnessed the achievement of power by a new party with a stock 
of ideas partly evolved from British Eadicalism, and partly from European 
Socialism, but adapted to Australian conditions and requirements. In 1895, 
so keen a political observer as Jenks could write a History of the Australasian 
Colonies, without mentioning the existence of a Labour Party as a factor of 
serious consequence. In 1904, only nine years later, there was a Labour 
Government — the Watson Administration — in charge of the affairs of the 
Commonwealth. That political developments occurred on other lines than 
those foreseen by the framers of the Constitution should not have been 
surprising to any student of comparative and historical politics ; but few 
could have expected so rapid a demand for radical alterations in the Consti- 
tution itself as the leaders of the Labour Party are convinced is necessary 



History of Australia. 31 



to the carrying out oE their policy. These change? have been twice sub- 
mitted to the electors, but have not been approved, though it is a fact of 
significance that the vote in favour of them at the last referendum (1913) 
showed a distinct advance upon the af&rmative vote at the previous sub- 
mission in 1911. 

The creation of the Labour Party as a political power of first-class import- 
ance has, of course, caused prominence to be given to industrial legislation. 
Apart from this, the main matters of policy laid down, on the principles of 
which there is scarcely a difference between parties, relate to the exclusion 
of undesirable immigrants, including all coloured peoples ; the protection 
of Australian industries, by a tariff, against foreign competition ; the develop- 
ment of the defensive power of the country by a system of compulsory 
military training, and the establishment of an up-to-date fleet, to act in 
co-operation with British fleets. The Northern Territory, that is, the- 
immense area extending from the northern border of South Australia to the 
Arafura Sea, was from 1863 administered by South Australia, and entailed 
heavy financial responsibilities. In 1907 the Federal Government assumed 
responsibility for it, and is now vigorously prosecuting a policy of develop- 
ment. The Commonwealth in 1906 took over the government of British 
New Guinea, which was re-named Papua, and here also there has been an 
application of capital and science. The choice of a site for a federal capital 
was the subject of prolonged investigations, negotiations, and parliamentary 
contention ; but at length, in 1908, a situation in the district of Yass-Canberra. 
was selected. Designs have been approved, and the work of construction 
is in progress. It was determined in 1913 that the name of the capital should 
be Canberra. The city when built will be connected by rail with a port at 
Jervis Bay. 

11. Bibliography. 

The hmitations of this brief history of Australia have permitted the many 
phases to be indicated only in a summary manner ; and it is desirable to 
append a short list of books whence fuller information may be obtained. 
The best compendious history is that of A. W. Jose, History of Australasia^ 
The latest edition (Sydney, 1913) is an admirable book. It is well illustrated. 
Jenks' History of the Australasian Colonies (Cambridge, 1895, and later 
editions) is especially valuable for its chapters (VII. and XI.) on constitu- 
tional matters. Rusden's History of Australia (2nd edition, 1897) is in three 
volumes. G. B. Barton's History of New South Wales (1889) is limited in 
scope, but very good. The eight volumes of the Historical Records of New- 
South Wales, edited byF. M. Bladen (Sydney, 1893-8), contain valuable docu- 
mentary material up to the year 1813. Most of the early literature concerning 
New South Wales is rare, and some of it is very costly. One useful early 
book, Collins' History of New South Wales (1798), has been reprinted (1810). 
Collingridge, First Discovery of Australia (1906) and Favenc, History of Aus- 
tralian Exploration (1888) are useful books. Becke and Jeft'ery, Naval 
Pioneers of Australia (1899) is good. Scott's Terre Napoleon (1910) deals, 
with the French explorations. Marion Phillips, A Colonial Autocracy (1909) 
is an excellent monograph on the regime of Governor Macquarie. The best 
history of a State since the spread of settlement from Sydney is the History 



32 Federal Handbook. 



o/ the Colony of Victoria of Henry Gyles Turner (1904). The same author 
has written a volume on The First Decade of the Australian Commonwealth 
(1911), and (1913) a good little book on the Eureka Stockade incident. 
Hodder's History oj South Australia (1893) is also a work of repute. The 
historical introduction to Quick and Garran's Annotated Constitution of the 
Australian Commonwealth (1901) relates the story of the federal movement 
authoritatively. On the Federal Constitution the principal work is that of 
Harrison Moore, The Constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia (latest 
edition, 1910). B. R. Wise's Commonwealth of Australia (1909) is written 
with a full knowledge of the currents of thought that shaped public opinion. 
The same author's Making of the Australian Commonwealth (1913) is an 
admirable " record by an eye-witness " of the critical period from 1889 to 
1900. Of biographical works, three of particular value may be mentioned : 
Henderson's Sir George Grey (1902), Lyne's lAfe of Sir Henry Parkes 
(1897), and Morris' Memoir of G. Higinbotham. Parkes' Fifty Years of the 
making of Australian History (1892) is autobiographical and of considerable 
value. There is a useful chronological table of the chief events since the 
establishment of settlement in Australia in the Commonwealth Official Year- 
Book, 1913. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 



33 



CHAPTER n. 

THE ABORIGINALS OF AUSTRALIA. 

By W. Baldwin Spencer, C.M.G., M.A., F.R.S., Professor of Biology in the 

University of Melbourne, Special Commissioner for Aboriginals, 

Northern Territory. 



SYNOPSIS. 



1. ixtroductiox. 

2. Organization. 

3. ToTEMic Systems and Totemism. 

4. Initiation. 

5. Beliefs in Reincarnation and 

Spirit Children. 



6. 



9. 
10. 



Beliefs in Superior Beings. 
Magic and Medicine Men. 
Ceremonies associated with Death 

AND Burial. 
Weapons and Implements. 
Decorative Art. 



L Introduction. 

In the short space available it is impossible to do more than touch upon 
certain of the more important features in regard to the aboriginals. It 
is probable that, with the exception of one or two isolated groups, they 
represent the most backward race extant and, in many respects, reveal 
to us the conditions under which the early ancestors of the present human 
races existed. It must, however, always be remembered, from the point 
of view of savage life, that conditions in Australia, during the time that it 
has been inhabited by human beings, have differed much from those in 
Europe, Asia, Afi-ica, and America, in that first, Australia has never been 
stocked with wild animals dangerous to human beings or with any apparently 
suitable for domestication. Even supposing there had been animals suitable 
for domestication, it is quite possible that the aboriginal would have done 
nothing with them. There are plenty of grass seeds that he uses daily 
to grind up and make into crude cakes, but it never strikes him that it would 
be advantageous to sow the seed, and so insure a certain amount of safe 
food supply. In many tribes at least this is to be associated with the fact 
that he knows nothing of the relation between the seed and the adult plant 
and thinks that the latter grows because he makes it do so by means of 
magic. Secondly, and perhaps more important, the Australian aboriginal, 
since the present race has inhabited the continent, has never had to contend 
with any higher race. He has developed along his own lines without the 
impetus given by competition with other peoples. In Europe, early man 
had to contend with bisons, rhinoceros, tigers, lions, bears, and hyaenas, 
a condition of affairs which must have sharpened his wits ; in Australia 
he has had nothing more fearsome to meet than huge diprotodons and giant 
kangaroos, who were quite as anxious to get away from him as he was to 
capture and eat them. All that he has "had to contend with have been men 
(jf his own, or a lower level, and, at times and in certain parts, climatic condi- 
tions that trained him to habits of keen observation. 



In writing tliis account I have relied princiiially on the followinn works for infonmtion witli lepard 
to the tribes inhabiting the different parts of the continent with which they respectively deal : — 

(1) A. W. Howitt. " Native Tribes of Soiith-east Australia." 

(2) W. E. Roth. " Ethnolopical Studies amoncHt the North-west Queensland Aborigines " : 

also Bulletins published by the (Jueensland Government. 

(3) B. Spencer and V. J. GlUen. (1) "Native Tribes of Central Australia." (2) "Northern 

Tribes oi Centralia." 

(4) John iMathew. " Two Representative Tribes of (Jucensland." 

(5) Mrs. 1). M. Bates. " Social Organization of some Western Australian Tribes." Report 

A.A.A.S. Melbourne. Vol. XIV., 1913. 

C.12ir)4. C 



31 Federal Handbook. 



There has been much speculation in regard to the origin of the present 
Australian race.* There can be no doubt but that in past times the whole 
of the continent, including Tasmania, was occupied by one race. This 
original, and probably Negritto population, at an early period was widely 
spread over Malayasia and Australia, including Tasmania, which at that 
time was not shut off by Bass Strait. The Tasmanians had no boats capable 
of crossing the latter and must have gone over on land. Subsequently, there 
came a time when the land sank, leaving the higher parts above water in 
the form of King Island on the west, and the Kent, Furneaux, and Flinders 
Islands on the east. A remnant of the old Negritto population was thus 
left stranded in Tasmania, where Homo tasmanianus survived until he came 
in contact with Europeans and was exterminated. There seems to be no 
doubt about this; what happened next is not so clear. Homo tasmanianus 
had frizzly hair, characteristic of negroid races. His weapons and imple- 
ments were of the most primitive kind ; long, pointed, unbarbed spears, 
no spear thrower, no boomerang, simple throwing sticks and only the crudest 
form of chipped stone axes, knives and scrapers that were never hafted.f 
Unfortunately, of his orginiz ition, cu^^toms, and beliefs we know but little 
in detail. It is often, indeed usually, assumed that (1) at a later period 
an immigration of a higher race took place, and that (2) this race blended 
with the older inhabitants of the continent to produce the present Australian 
race. In regard to the first of these two assumptions every one is agreed, 
but in regard to the second there is room for grave doubt. 

Mr. J. Mathew suggests that " a superior race, akin perhaps to the 
Dravidian of India, the Veddahs of Ceylon, and the Toalas of Celebes, though 
not necessarily derived from one of these lands, migrated into Australia 

from the north-east They pressed forward gradually, 

absorbing or exterminating the lowlier earlier inhabitants 

The vestiges of the Tasmanian are more pronounced in Victoria, which is 
shown by the fact that the Victorian dialects contain a number of pure 
Tasmanian words. The Australians of historic times are, therefore, a 
hybrid race, constituted mainly of the Tasmanian and Asiatic elements." 
Mr. Mathew suggests that "the two races are represented by the two primary 
classes or phratries of Australian society, which were generally designated 
by names indicating a contrast of colour such as eaglehawk and crow. The 
crow, black cockatoo, etc., would represent the Tasmanian element ; the 
eaglehawk, white cockatoo, etc., the so-called Dravidian." I do not, 
however, think it can be said that the moiety names, except m a few cases, 
and these representing only a small part of the continent, lend any serious 
support to the theory of the mixture of two races differing in colour. 

Mr. Mathew also postulates a comparatively recent slight infusion of Malay 
blood in the northern half of Australia. There is, however, pra,ctically 
no evidence of Malay infusion. One of the most striking features of the 
Malay is his long, lank hair, and yet it is just in these north parts that the 
most frizzly hair is met with. Judging indeed by all accounts, the Malay 
had very little chance of intercourse with the aborigin-^l, who killed 

• For recent di.'sfussions on this subject reference may be made to Hewitt. " Native Tribes of 
South-East Australia," and J. Mathew, " Two Representative Tribes of Queensland." 

t Such information as we have is collected in " The Aborigines of Tasmania " H. Ling Roth, 
2nd. Edit. 1899. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 



35 



the intruder when he could. Mr. Sydney H. Ray,* the most com- 
petent authority, says : — ■" There is no evidence of an African, Andaman, 
Papuan, or Malay connexion with the Australian languages. There are 
reasons for regarding the Australian as in a similar morphological stage to 
the Dravidiaii, but there is no genealogical relationship proved." 

Of one thing I think we may feel quite sure, and that is that if we have 
two savage races, whom we will call A and B, and if one is on a higher level 
of culture than the other, has better weapons and is generally more capable, 
there is not the slightest chance of any men of the lower level, say B, mating 
with women of the higher level A. Nor is there much likelihood of a man 
of the higher race mating with a woman of the lower. As a matter of fact 
it is most probable that the lower race would be exterminated, just as the 
Moriori was in New Zealand by the incoming Maori. Mr. Mathew's theory, 
on the other hand, requires the two races — a lower and a higher one — to 
combine on equal terms. In the case of an invading race occupying the 
country of another that is living in more or less settled communities, some 
such union might take place, but we must remember that, in the case of 
Australia, we are dealing with wild, savage nomads, and, judging by what 
we know of the feelings of the present day natives in regard to strangers, 




KISHFlM 

CRCWAGNON 
TASfAANlANS 
BRUNN 

AUSTRftimNS 



SPY-NEftNDERTKn. 



it is almost inconceivable that any such combination 
would take place. The same objection, to a large 
extent, applies to the theory put forward first by 
Messrs. Flower and Lydekker and adopted by Dr. 
Howitt, of the mixture of the original Negritto with a 
dark-coloured Caucasian. It is, at least, very doubtful 
if the present Australian race shows any trace of inter- 
mixture with the primitive Negritto that formerly 
inhabited the continent, and it is at all events very 
suggestive that we never meet amongst recent Aus- 
tralians with any indication of real frizzly hair, one 
of the chief characteristics of the Negritto. If there 
had been any such blending we might expect to find 
some such trace of it in the south of the continent 
where there is none. Some authors regard the 
Australian as a pure race, but it is much more probable 
that it is a blend, but between what races it is thus 
a blend is a matter of conjecture only. Careful 
anthropometric investigations carried on in Professor 
Berry's laboratory in the Melbourne University seem 
to have established the fact that, of the three races, 
Tasmanian, Papuan, and Australian, the first is the 
most pure, the second the least, and the third mid- 
way between them. The general position occupied 
by the Australian and Tasmanian aboriginals in 
regard to various prehistoric races is indicated 
on the accompanying chart (Fig. 1), drawn up ch-^;""^-/;^^^^^^ 

a series of """i'"''! Aboriginals in rela 
tion to cxtin 't races. Drawn 

'■ number of i>y \v. .M. itoimcs, m.a.. u.sc 



PITHECANTHROPI!* 



ANTHROPOID 



Fid. 1. 



by Mr. Holmes, as the result of 
skull measurements made on a larj; 



Reports Camb. Expd. to Torres Straits, 1907, p. 258. 
C 2 



36 Federal Handbook. 



aboriginals.* A certain value is allowed to selected important characters, 
and the whole results are then worked out mathematically, giving the 
relative positions of each of the specimens and groups indicated. The 
diagram is very interesting and yet, despite the results that it shows, 
there is no doubt at all that the present Australian aboriginal is considerably 
in advance of the Tasmanian. His weapons are notably superior to those 
of the latter, and it is quite certain that, if the two races came into contact, 
the Tasmanian would be exterminated, although as is shown in the chart, 
the Tasmanian, in skull measurements, is placed above the Australian. 
Very evidently skull measurements are liable, if taken alone, to give rise 
to misleading conclusions. 

The accompanying illustrations (Figs. 2-10) will serve to give a general 
idea of the physical features of the Australian native at different periods 
of his life. At birth he is copper coloured, but within a few days he assumes 
the usual dark chocolate tint characteristic of the adult. 

In the matter of personal appearance, while conforming generally to 
what is known as the Australian type, there is considerable variation. The 
man varies from, approximately, a maximum of 6 ft. 3 in. to a minimum 
of 5 ft. 2 in. There are, however, very few aboriginals indeed who reach 
the maximum height indicated. As a general rule, few of them are taller 
than 5 ft. 8 in. the women vary between 5 ft. 9 in. and 4 ft. 9 in. Their 
average height is not more than .5 ft. 2 in. The brow ridges are strongly 
marked, especially in men, and the forehead slopes back. The nose is broad, 
with the root deep set. In colour, the native is dark chocolate.^brown, not 
black. The hair in the men varies to a very great extent. It miiy be almost 
straight, decidedly wavy — its usual feature — or almost, but never really, 
frizzly. The figures A^dll show this well. The beard also may be well 
developed or almost absent. In some parts, the elder men pull the hair 
out on the upper and lower lips, an extreme example of which is met with 
on Melville Island where, during initiation ceremonies, some of them pull 
out the whole of their beards. The women very seldom have hair of any 
length, which is due to the fact that it is periodically cut ; at all events, 
it is a common feature of drawings and photographs of women from all 
parts that the hair is never more than a few inches long and, in all the 
central and northern tribes, it is the duty of a woman to cut her hair and 
make it into string. 

In skull measurements the native is dolichocephalic or long b cade a. 
His hands are decidedly small, the average span being little more than 
6 inches. The hole cut for the hand in many of his shields is too small 
for an ordinary white man to use. Every native is marked by scars, the 
numl>er and arrangement of which vary much (Fig. 5). It has been stated 
that these scars indicate either the tribe or the class of the individual. This 
may be so in some cases, but only very rarely. In all the central and northern 
tribes, amongst whom they are especially well developed, they have no 
relation whatever to any tribal, class, or totemic group, with the solitary 
exception of the Melville Islanders, who may always be recognised by their 
remarkable series of cicatrices, forming a " herring-bone " pattern. The 
cuts are made with 'a sharp stone, ashes, or birds' down being rubbed into 

• I am indebted to Professor Berry for permission to use this chart 



Aboriginals of Australia. ,37 

the wound, which gives rise to a thick, rib-like mass of keloid tissue. They 
are present on women as well as men and are regarded as ornamental. 
In some cases, instead of lines there are dots made by searing the skin with 
the red hot end of a firestick. Various authors have referred to the scars 
on the women as evidence of harsh treatment. This is not so ; they are 
self-inflicted. 

In regard to their manner of life it must be remembered that they are 
pure nomads, the members of a tribe hunting over the land that has belonged 
to their ancestors and not encroaching on that of other tribes. There 
are favorite hunting and camping grounds and here they will stay as long 
as food and water supplies are abundant, moving on to other places when these 
become scarce. During the day they are out in the scrub, the men hunting 
larger game, the women and children in search of smaller animals, grass 
seed and yams. Attention has often been drawn to their great power of 
tracking, a faculty which they must cultivate if they are to live. Their 
evenings are spent in the performance of the ordinary dances called corro- 
borees, in which, as a general rule, only men perform, while the rest of the camp 
makes the audience (Figs. 11 and 12). Each corroboree has its own decora- 
tions and songs and may occupy the evenings of two or three weeks. Apart 
from this ordinary camp life, there is, however, so far as the men are con- 
cerned, quite another side which may be spoken of as the ceremonial. It is 
difficult to say exactly how much time is occupied by this, but in many 
tribes at least half the life of a man is spent in attendance upon, or taking 
part in, ceremonies of a sacred nature that only initiated men may 
witness, and the older a man becomes the more time he spends in this 
way. 

Finally it must be remembered that owing to the vast area over which 
the tribes are scattered and the very different conditions under which they 
live, some exposed to the often fierce heat and, it may be, droughts of the 
interior, others living amongst the shady forests of the south-eastern ranges, 
and others again camped by the side of the rivers and waterpools in the far 
north, with a constant and plentiful food supply, there are, of necessity, 
great variations in customs, organization and beliefs. It may be said 
that, so far as we are now acquainted with them, the different tribes may 
be regarded as descended from ancestors who all observed certain customs 
and were regulated by a common social organization. In course of time, 
as they wandered over the continent and became divided into groups, locally 
isolated from one another, they developed along different lines ; and yet, 
amongst much that is divergent, it is, on the whole, surprising how much 
there is that is similar in their customs, beliefs, and organization. 

2. Organization. 

The first serious attempt to study Australian tribal organization in 
detail was made by Messrs. Howitt and Fison, who published their results 
from 1800 onward ; Kamilroi an I, Kurnai may be regarded as having 
laid the foundation of our knowledge of Australian Anthropology. In this 
work they demonstrated the existence of (1) two primary exogamous moieties 
and (2) totemic groups. In the case of the Kamilroi tribe, the organization 
of a typical Australian tribe was set forth for the first time and it was shown 

fVOl 5 »>/ 



38 Federal Handbook. 



that the so-called " terms of relationship " were fundamentally group and 
not individual terms. At a later period Dr. Eoth dealt in detail with the 
organization of Queensland tribes, Dr. Howitt published his final results 
in regard to the tribes of south-eastern Australia, the central and northern 
tribes were dealt with by the late Mr. Gillen and myself, Eev. John Mathew 
published his results of investigations into two Queensland tribes, and Mrs. 
D. M. Bates is now publishing the results of her work on Western Australian 
tribes. 

As might be expected, there is great variation in regard to the organization 
of tribes inhabiting different parts of the continent. Speaking generally, 
we may say that every tribe is divided into two moieties ; this is the fun- 
damental feature.* Each of these is divided into two classes, and each 
of these into sub-classes, so that, in what may be regarded as the most 
highly developed normal tribes, we have two moieties with four sub-classes 
in each, and further the names applied to corresponding male and female 
sub-classes differ. This organization governs kinship and as, with its 
associated terras of relationship, it refers to the whole tribe and to everv 
member of the tribe, so each individual has a kinship or relationship term 
that he applies to every member of his own tribe, and not only this, but to 
members of other tribes if they happen to visit his camp or if he goes to 
theirs, as may often happen during the performance of important ceremonies. 
These terms of relationship are quite different from those amongst ourselves 
and they might better be called group terms. In some, but very few cases, 
there are terms that are applied to individuals, but these are rarely met with, 
and it is only by realizing the fact that the group, and not the individual, 
lies at the basis of the organization of Australian tribes that, not only theii 
organization, but their habits, customs, and beliefs can be understood. 
They have no terms corresponding precisely in meaning to our words mother, 
father, sister, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law. In the Pitta Pitta 
tribe, for example, described by Eoth in Queensland, a woman calls her 
actual mother " umma," but she applies the same name to each membei' 
of the group of women, any one of whom her father might have married. 
A man calls his actual wife or wives " nopa," but he applies the same term to 
each member of the group of women, any one of whom he might lawfully 
have married, and so on right through the whole series of terms. Not only is 
this so, but the group relationship shows out strongly during the performance 
of all their ceremonies and even in camp life. There are, for example, men 
of a certain group who may lawfully marry women of another group. If 
the father of one of his eligible wives dies, though the man may never have 
seen the father or his daughter, it is still his duty to cut himself in the same 
way as if his actual wife's father had died. So again, if he catches a wallaby, 
if there be any man in camp whose daughter he might lawfully marry, even 
if the man has no daughter, he must still present him with food. The affairs 
of any individual are, at bottom, mainly concerned with the group of which 
he is a member, the family enters to a slight, but only a very slight, extent. 
During the very large and by far the most important part of his life when 
he is associated with his fellow tribesmen, and often tribeswomen also, in 

• For suggestions with regard to this, cf. John Mathew, " Eaglehawk and Crow," also " Two Repre- 
sentative (Jueensland Tribes." 



Aboriginals of Australia. 



39 



the performance of the multifarious ceremonies that occupy so much of his 
time and thoughts, it is the group that is all predominant, the family is 
unrecognised. 

In order to give some idea of the main features in regard to the organization 
of the tribes, we will take certain examples which may be regarded as repre- 
sentative of them, though, of course, only salient points can be noted in 
such a sketch as this. Taking Australian tribes as a whole, we may divide 
them into five groups : — 

(1) Those with two moieties and no class names. In all of these 

descent is counted in the maternal line. 

(2) Those in which the moieties are divided into two or four classes or 

sub-classes and in which descent is counted in the maternal 
line. 

(3) Those in which the moieties are each divided into two or four 

classes or sub-classes and in which descent is counted in the 
indirect paternal line. 

(4) Those in which the moieties are each divided into two classes 

and in which descent is counted in the direct paternal line. 

(5) Tribes that may probably be regarded as abnormal, inhabiting 

coastal areas in certain parts, such as Victoria and the 
Northern Territory, in which, if any class organization were 
ever present, it has been superseded by some form of local 
organization. 

(1) Tribes loith two moieties, but no classes. 

These are only met with in the interior of the continent, and probably 
represent the most primitive form of organization, but it must be remembered 
that, though there are no class names, yet there are groups of individuals, 
standing in definite relationships to one another, who correspond to the groups 
of individuals to whom class and sub-class names are given in other tribes. 
In some cases, the moiety names are Kararu and Matteri, or variants of 
these ; in others they are Mukwara and Kilpara. Of these tribes we may 
take the Dieri as an example. A Kararu man marries a Matteri woman 
and their children are Matteri ; a Matteri man marries a Kararu woman and 
their children are Kararu. 



(2) Tribes in which the moieties are divided hito two classes, and descent is 
counted in the maternal line. 

We may take two examples of these — (a) the Pitta Pitta, described by 
Roth, the organization of which is similar to that of many of the Central 
Queensland tribes. It may be represented thus : — 



1 


2 


3 


4 


Utaru. 


Pakuta. 


Children. 


Children. 


Kupuru 
Wungko 


KurkiUa 
Bunburi 


Bunburi 
Kurkilla 


Wungko 
Kupuru 



40 



Federal Handbook. 



The two moieties are Utaru and Pakuta, each of which has two classes. 
The system is, that men of cohimn 1 marry women of column 2, and their 
children are shown in column 3. Men of column 2 marry women of column 
1, and their children are as shown in column 4. It will be seen that a woman's 
children belong to her moiety but to the class to which she does not ; in other 
words, we have direct maternal descent of the moiety and indirect of the 
class. 

The second example is the Kamilroi, described by Howitt and 
Pison, the organization of which is similar to that of many tribes in the 
interior of New South Wales and Queensland. It agrees fundamentally 
with the Pitta Pitta, but has distinct names for males and females, 
thus : — 



1 


2 


3 


4 


Kupathin. 


Dilbi. 


Children. 


Children. 


Ipai (Ipatha) 
Kumbo (Butha) 


Kubi (Kubitha) 
Murri (Matha) 


Murri (Matha) Kumbo (Butha) 
Kubi (Kubitha) Ipai (Ipatha) 



Descent is counted in the indirect female line, so far as the class is con- 
cerned, but, in addition to the ordinary marriage, it is permissible for a man 
to marry a woman belonging to the same moiety as himself, but to another 
totemic group. So far as the class name is concerned, the children take the 
one they would have taken had their mother married the correct man. 
It may be noted that in all tribes, when an irregular marriage is 
permitted, the children always take the class appropriate to the normal 
marriage of the woman. 



(3) Tribes in which the moieties are divided into two or four classes, and in which 
descent is counted in the indirect paternal line. 

These tribes occupy a very large area in the centre and northern parts 
of the continent, and probably extend right across into Western Australia ; 
at all events, we know they stretch beyond the far western end of the 
Macdonnell Eanges, and are met with again in the West. The Arunta, 
Karriara, and Warramunga may be taken as types. The Arunta organization 
in the southern part of the tribe is thus : — 



1 


2 


3 


4 


Moiety 1. 


Moiety 2. 


Children. 


1 

Children. 


Panunga 
Bulthara 


Purula 
Kumara 


Bulthara 
Panunga 


Kumara 
1 Bulthara 



Aboriginals of Australia. 



41 



In the southern part of the tribe there are only four class names, but, as a 
matter of fact, each of these is divided into two groups. If we take for 
example the Panunga and Purula, two intermarrjing groups, we find that 
we can arrange them as follows, using the letters « and P' to indicate the two 
groups : — 

Panunga « marries Purula <>■, children are Bulthara /?. 

Panunga ,5 marries Purula ^J', children are Bulthara «. 

A Panunga « man calls Purula 'i- women Unawa, Panunga /5 men Ifmunna, 
and Pm"ula i^ women Unkulla. The Unawa women are eligible as wives, 
the Unkulla are not, under normal conditions. In the northern part of the 
tribe distinct names are given to the groups which now form what are called 
eight sub-classes, but, as said before, these are always functionally present. 

The names and marriage arrangements are as follows, the equivalent 
groups in the southern part of the tribe being placed in brackets : — 



Moiety 1. 



Panunga 
(Panunga a) 
Uknaria 
(Panunga j8) 
Bulthara 
(Bulthara a) 
Appungerta 
(Bulthara /3) 



Moiety 2. 


Children. 


Purula 
(Purula a) 
Ungalla 


Appungerta 
(Bulthara /3) 
Bulthara 


(Purula j3) 
Kumara 


(Bulthara /3) 
Uknaria 


(Kumara a) 
Umbitchana 


(Panunga /3) 
Panunga 


(Kumara /3) 


(Panunga a) 



Children. 



Kumara 

(Kumara a) 
Ubitchana 
(Kumara /3) 
Purula 
(Purula a) 
Ungalla 
(Purula j6) 



The organization of the Kaitish, Warramunga, and other tribes in the 
northern central area, as far as the Katharine River in the north, and east- 
wards towards the Gulf of Carpentaria, is fundamentally the same with, of 
course, different names for sub-classes and, in many, distinct names for the 
corresponding women's classes, giving thus sixteen class names in all, a featiu'e* 
described also by Mrs. Bates in East Kimberley tribes in Western Australia. 
Thus, for example, in the Warramunga, the equivalent of the Uknaria, men 
are called TJunguri, and the women of the same group Namigilli. In some 
tribes also the moiety names are retained. In the Warramunga, the equiva- 
lent of moiety 1 in the Arunta is called Uluuru, and that of moiety 2 Kingilli. 
In the Karriara tribe in Western Australia, as described by Mrs. Bates, the 
moiety names are lost, four classes are present, and the marriage arrangements 
are as follows : — 



1 


2 


3 


4 


Moiety 1. 


Moiety 2. 


Children. 


Children. 


Banaka 
Paljari 


Boorong 
Kaimera 


Paljari 
Banaka 


Kaimera 
Boorong 



It will bo seen that, except for the class names, the ari'angemcut is 
identical with what is met with in the southern Arunta, and a similar 
organization is evidently widely spread in We.stern Australia. 



• Mrs. D. M. Bates. 
Vol. XIV., 1913. 



"Social Organization of some Western Australian Trihcs." Report, A.A.A.S. 



42 



Federal Handbook. 



(4) Tribes in ivhich the moieties are divided into four classes, and in which 
descent is counted in the direct paternal line, so far as the class name is 
concerned. 
The Mara tribe inliabiting country between the Eoper and Macarthur 

Kivers may be taken as a type. The arrangement is as follows : — - 



1 


2 


3 


4 


MUuri. 


TJmbaua. 


Children. 


Children. 


Murungun a 
Muningun /3 
Mumbali a 
Mumbali /3 


Purdal a 
Kuial 13 
Kuial a 
Purdal 13 


Murungun /3 
Murungun a 
Mumbali /3 
Mumbali a 


Purdal /3 
Kuial a 
Kuial 13 
Purdal a 



There are four classes, but each of these is again divided into two, dis- 
tinguished by the letters a and ,i. The arrangement has the appearance 
of being very definitely thought out, and there is further a very definite 
scheme, by means of which the divisions (Murungun a, ,?, etc.) are made to 
fit in with the corresponding sub-classes in other tribes with whom the Mara 
constantly come into contact. 

(.5) Abnortnal tribes in ivhich class organization has apparently been superseded 
by some form of local organization. 

As an example of these, we may take the Kurnai tribe which, many years 
ago, occupied the mountains in eastern Victoria. It was divided into five 
groups named after the localities in which they lived. There was no class 
organization and a man could not marry a woman of his own local group. 
There were intermarrying local groups, marriage being by elopement. 

As a second example, we may mention the Kakadu and allied tribes 
living at the other extremity of the continent on the Coburg Peninsula and 
Alligator Rivers. They have apparently no class organization and the 
totem does not regulate marriage. The tribe is divided into local groups 
and a man of one local group takes a wife from another particular group. 
There are explicit traditions which purport to explain the origin of this 
local system. 

3. Totem ic Systems and Totem ism. 

In dealing with Australian tribes the word " totem " has been applied in 
at least three different senses. 

(1) The Group totem, that is the material object giving its name to a 
group of individuals who commonly believe themselves to be descended 
from it. The name of the totem usually passes by inheritance from 
generation to generation, sometimes in the maternal, sometimes in the 
paternal line. 

(2) The Sex totem, discovered by Dr. Howitt in the Kurnai and Wot- 
joballuk trbes in Victoria, where it exists side by side with the group totem. 
The women have one animal, such as the owlet night- jar, associated with 
them and the man another, such as the bat. This is of rare occurrence. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 4-3 

(3) The Individual totem, usually acquired by dreaming of some animal- 
This also is of rare occurrence and w^s first described by Dr. Howitt, but has 
been recently described by Mrs. Bates as occurring also in some Western 
Australian tribes. 

So far as Australia is concerned, it is advisable to restrict the term totem 
to the first of these and to define it as a material object that (1) gives its 
name to a group of individuals and (2) the name of which is usually 
hereditary either in the maternal or paternal line and the term totemism 
to a system based on the recognition of these two factors. It must be 
remembered that there are very considerable variations in regard to 
totemic customs and beliefs in different tribes. We will deal with totemism 
under three aspects. 

(1) The Social Aspect, 

By this is meant the division of the tribe into totem groups, their influence. 
if any, on marriage and the mode in which each individual becomes associated 
with any one of them. 

We have already seen that most tribes are divided into moieties and 
these into classes. As a general rule, the totemic groups are distributed 
between the two moieties in such a way that each group is confined to one or 
other of them. We will take a series of tribes from different parts of the 
continent as typical of the more important variations in regard to the social 
aspect. 

(1) The Dierl. — ^This is representative of tribes in which the moieties are 
not divided into classes. These moieties are called Kararu and Matteri 
and the totem groups are divided between them. Kararu has rain, carpet 
snake, crow, frog, etc. ; Matteri has a cormorant, emu, eagle, hawk, native 
cat, etc. A Kararu man must marry a Matteri woman and is not restricted 
in his choice to any one totem group. The children follow the mother's 
totem. 

(2) The Kamilroi. — This is representative of a large number of tribes, 
such as the Whakelbura, occupying a vast area of country sweeping round 
inland of the coastal ranges, from the Gulf of Carpentaria in the north to the 
River Murrav in the south. The totems are divided between the moieties. 
There are four classes and of these Ipai-Kumbo and Murri-Kubbo have totems 
in common. The children take the mother's totem. 

(3) The Arunta. — This is representative of an important group, including 
the Arunta, Ilpirra, Unmatjera, and Kaitish tribes. There are four classes 
or eight sub-classes and the totem groups are not restricted to the moieties. 
Each group is, however, always more largely represented in one moiety than 
the other. Marriage between individuals of the same totemic name is not 
forbidden, but rarely takes place. The country occupied by the Arunta is 
dotted over with special spots inhabited by the spirits of old totemic ancestors, 
who enter women and undergo reincarnation. The traditions are very 
precise in regard to these totemic centres, so that the natives knowing, or 
thinking they do, where any particular spirit child entered a woman, are 
able to assign its totem to it. In the Kaitish, the most northern of these 
tribes, the totemic groups are more nearly divided between the moieties 
than in the Arunta A man very rarely marries a woman of his own totem 



44 Federal Handbook. 



and there is a strong tendency for the descent of the totem to be in the male 
line, as is always the case in the class names. Each individual is normally 
associated with one totem group. 

(4) The Warramunga. — This is representative of the Warramunga, 
Tjingilli, and other tribes occupying a large area in the centre and extending 
across to the Queensland border. The totem groups are strictly divided 
between the moieties. A man may marry a woman of any totem in the 
moiety to which he does not belong, provided she belongs to the right class. 
Strict paternal descent of the totem is nearly, but not quite, the rule, but every 
child belongs to a totem group in its father's moiety. For example, a black 
snake man's children are almost always black snake, though rarely one may 
belong to another totem group such as rain. As the moieties are exogamous, 
it follows that the totems are the same. 

(5) The Binbinga. — This is representative of a group of tribes that 
occupy the country drained by the Macarthur Eiver flowing into the Gulf of 
Carpentaria. The organization is closely similar to that of the Warramunga, 
but in these tribes not only are the totem groups divided between the moieties, 
but the descent of the totem name is strictly in the father's line. 

(6) There remain certain tribes in which the descent is anomalous, such, 
for example, as the Kurnai, in the southern coastal district of Victoria, and the 
Kakadu nation in the far north, occupying the Coburg Peninsula and the 
the country drained by the Alligator Eivers. These tribes are evidently 
much modified. They have no class system and marriage is regulated by 
the existence of local intermarrying groups. In the Kakadu each spirit 
individual has a double nature, one part enters the woman, one part remains 
outside. It chooses its own totem and the spirit part that remains outside 
tells the father the totem name of the child. 

(2) The Ceremonial Aspect. 
This side of totemism has probably been very strongly developed through- 
out the whole of Australia, though it has only been much studied during 
recent years, when, unfortunately, in the whole of Victoria and New South 
Wales and in most parts of Queensland, the tribes have become decadent. 
It is interesting to note that one of the earliest accounts that we have of the 
natives — that given by Collins in 1804 — evidently describes one of these 
performances. Speaking generally, it may be said that every totemic group 
has certain ceremonies associated with it and that these refer to old totemic 
ancestors. In all tribes they form part of a secret ritual in which only 
initiated men take part. In most tribes a certain number are shown to the 
youths during the early stages of initiation, but at a later period he sees many 
more. In the Arunta, for example, the final stage is concerned with the 
Engwura and during the performance of this a long series is performed 
(Figs. 13 and 14). It may extend over a period of three months, during 
which totemic ceremonies are enacted daily. To start an Engwura, the leader 
of some totemic group, after consultation with those of others, sends out a 
messenger called Ilchinkinja, which means " the beckoning hand." He 
carries a Churinga and passes over the country delivering his message at 
different camps. Slowly the natives gather together at the chosen place, 
where a special ceremonial ground has been prepared. The Panunga- 
Bulthara camp together, and the Purula-Kumara, the division of the tribe 



Aboriginals of Australia. 45 

into two moieties being very marked during the Engwnra. Large numbers 
of Churinga are brought in and stored on two platforms far from one another. 
These are associated with the old ancestors and their living representatives 
and at times the old men call some of the younger ones together, rub the sticks 
with red ochre and tell the former all about the ancestors. Each ceremony 
is concerned with an ancestor and is the property of some old man who either 
performs it himself or invites a younger man to do so. At the close of the 
Engwura the men have to pass through three fire ordeals. During the first 
the women throw burning bushes over them ; during the second they have 
to lie down on bushes placed above red hot faggots and, during the third, 
they have to kneel for a few moments on a smouldering fire made by the 
women. Apart from this, the women take no part whatever in the 
ceremonies, after which are over the men are regarded as " ertwa mura 
oknira " — very good men. A characteristic feature of these ceremonies, the 
exact nature of which varies much in different parts of the continent, is that 
one or more men have their bodies decorated with a design which is especially 
associated with that ceremony and is usually drawn in coloured bird's down, 
always fixed on with human blood. Even more elaborate designs may 
sometimes be drawn on the ground (Figs. 29 end 30). 

(3) The Magical Aspect. 

In early days. Grey, who used the Western Australian word Kobong for 
totem, stated that " A certain mysterious connexion exists between a family 
and its kobong, so that a member of the family will never kill an animal of 
the species to which his kobong belongs, should, he find it asleep ; indeed, he 
always kills it reluctantly, and never without afiording it a chance to escape. 
This arises from the family belief that some one individual of the species is 
their nearest friend, to kill whom would be a great crime and carefully to be 
avoided." This idea of a close association between an individual and his 
totem is widely spread, but the exact beliefs and customs in regard to them 
difier very much in different parts. The general idea may be summed up 
in a remark made to us by a kangaroo man when we had taken his photogi-aph. 
We were asking him about the matter and he said, pointing to the photograph, 
" That is Just the same as me, so is a kangaroo." In some tribes there is a 
feeling of mutual protection between an individual and his totem, but this is 
not often met with. They are of the same flesh and the belief in the descent 
from the totemic animal is widespread. In some tribes the individual will not 
kill his totem ; ])ut in most there is no objection to his doing so and handing it 
to others to eat. In some he will both kill and e9.t it. The exact nature of 
the relationship and the way in which the native is influenced by it varies 
much and, speaking generally, the magical aspect of totemism appears to be 
largely associated with climatic conditions, so far as they affect the supply of 
food and water. Three typical examples of ceremonies will serve to show 
the nature of the magical aspect. In the Urabunna tribe, which counts 
descent in the female line, the ceremony is called Pitjinta. In a snake group 
the decorated performer kneels down and extends his arms. The skin on 
each fore-arm is then pinched up and he pierces it with a pointed bone 
(Fig. 15). When snakes become plentiful, men who do not belong to the 
totem group go and bring some in to the old man and say, " Look, here are 



46 Federal Handbook. 



snakes." He smears a little fat over his arms and the bone and then tells 
the men to eat the rest. The bones are wrapped in the hair of a snake man 
and put away. In the Arunta, the ceremonies are called Intichiuma and are 
very suggestive. In that of a grub group the men of the totem, no one else 
being present, start from camp in the morning in silence, fasting and devoid 
of arms and ornaments. Each man has a mark characteristic of the totem 
on his face. They go to a rocky gorge where there is a cave and in this a 
large stone that represents the adult insect and smaller ones that are its 
eggs. The former is reverently stroked by all while they chant refrains, the 
burden of which is an invitation to the insect to come and lay eggs. This 
over, they return to the camp, near to which a long bough hut has been 
built, supposed to represent the chrysalis case. Into this they all go and 
once or twice the leader comes out and shambles round in imitation of the 
adult insect emerging from its chrysalis. All men and women who do not belong 
to the group have to lie down with their faces on the ground while the women 
of the group stand up peering round in all directions and keeping watch 
over them. Some time later, when the grub is plentiful, every one goes out ; 
they collect large numbers, return to camp and cook them. The head man 
sits by himself. First the men who do not belong to the gi'oup and then 
those who do bring their supplies to him. He eats a little, gives some to a 
few of the older men and then hands all the rest to those who do not belong 
to the group, telling them to eat it. The grub men are not absolutely 
forbidden to eat it but they only do so sparingly. The leader must at this 
time eat a little, so as to identify himself with it, or else he would not be able 
to perform the ceremony successfully. In the Kakadu tribe, far in the north, 
there is a ceremony called Muraian that is evidently of the same nature, 
though it is not so detailed, owing, doubtless, to the normal abundance of 
food in this part. The natives have a large number of sacred sticks and 
stones, each supposed to represent a totemic animal or plant (Fig. 16). They 
may only be seen by the elder men and, during the ceremony, are grasped 
in the hands of men who dance round and round a central figure, stretching 
out the symbolic objects and yelling " Brau, Brau," which means " Give, 
give." It sounds almost like a command to the totemic object. 

In Western Australia Mrs. Bates has recorded that, in the East Pilbaru 
tribe, there are certain special spots, or local totem centres, called Thalu, 
where ceremonies for the increase of the totemic object are held, in which, 
unlike most tribes, women and children take some share. The same author 
describes how in the West Kimberley tribes the totems are " dreamed " by the 
totemites. When a young man has passed through some stages of his initia- 
tion, he begins to " dream " the increase of his totem. He dreams he is on 
his ngargarula booro (that is, the ground on which his father first saw him 
in a dream when he was a spirit baby). If he be an edible bean man, for 
example, he dreams he picks up a branch of the bean, chews it and spits it 
all about. When the time of beans comes round, a plentiful supply will result 
from the dream. 

There is no doubt but that in many tribes, and the belief was probably 
at one time widely spread over Australia, the natives firmly believe that by 
means of magical ceremonies such as these they can control their food 
supplies. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 47 

4. Initiation. 

In all Australian, tribes special cerenaouies of an important nature, which 
vary much in their details, attend both the initiation of youths to the status 
of men and that of girls to the status of women. In the case of the youth, 
initiation is almost universally associated with showing him the " bull- 
roarer " for the first time. It has different names in different parts — Chm'inga, 
Tundun, Kunapippi, etc. — but always consists of a thin slab of wood, or, 
more rarely, stone. It is pierced at one end by a hole, through which the 
string is passed, and by this means it is whirled round and round, making the 
noise that is usually supposed by women and children to be the voice of a 
great spirit that takes the youth away and initiates him. It is very difficult 
to understand the wide divergence in regard to the actual ceremonies 
characteristic of different groups of tribes. We have, generally speaking, 
three main types — (1) the knocking out of an incisor tooth, as amongst the 
Kurnai in the south-east ; (2) circumcision, followed in many, but by no 
means all, cases by sub-incision, amongst tribes occupying a vast area in 
the interior of New South Wales and Queeiisland, the whole of the central 
area and probably a large part of Western Australia ; (3) special ceremonies 
amongst groups of tribes such as those on Melville and Bathurst Islands and 
the Kakadu nation on the Alligator Rivers, amongst whom no mutilation 
of the bodv other than perhaps the pulling out of hairs takes place. We will 
briefly describe examples of each of these types. 

Of the first we will take the Kurnai as being of historic interest, because 
it was in connexion with it that the first adequate account of initiation was 
given by the late Dr. Howitt, who then also drew attention, for the first time, 
to the importance of the bull-roarer. To begin with, a man is sent out with 
a Tundun to summon distant groups. This may take months. When they 
come in, ordinary corroborees are held which serve to fill in the time until 
all have arrived. A ceremonial ground, called Bunan, is prepared by clearing 
an open space 30 to 50 yards long, and piling earth round it to form a low 
mound. A path leads away for about 400 yards into the scrub, where a busli 
house is bu'lt. The serious part of the ceremonies begins by a recently initiated 
youth walking by a log placed near the Bunan, and saying "A snake, a snake." 
Other men come up, pretend to be frightened, and then they all run away in 
single file. At first the women and children gather together in the middle of 
the Bunan, the men on the outside. The latter then jump over the mound 
and run round the women shouting out the names of the various contingents 
that have come in. The women come out and the men go in. The novices 
are amongst the women and, like them, sit with their backs to the men. 
On the Bunan the tooth song is sung, after which most of the men go to the 
bush house where the medicine men show their " joias," or magic stones, to 
the possession of which they owe their powers. Here, also, there are figures 
of animals, such as the spiny ant-eater, crow, snakes and especially one of 
Daramulun, who is regarded as the great father of the tribe. This over, they 
return to the Bunan, the youths are painted and fillets of grass bound round 
their foreheads by their mothers' brothers, who take charge of them and 
instruct them in tribal legends, laws and the power of medicine men, etc. 
A hot fire is made on the Bunan and tiie novices sit round on the mound 
each with a woman's digging stick between liis feet, containing the waist 



48 Federal Handbook. 



belt, forehead band and nose bone tbat he will wear when initiated. Behind 
each boy, covered with boughs, crouches his mother or her sister. Then the 
bull-roarer sounds, the women run away and the youths are taken to the 
bush house and covered with boughs. Once more they return to the Bunan 
and are told of Daramulun. Finally, a man, representing the latter, takes 
hold of each boy, applies his lower incisor to the left upper of the boy and 
presses it up. Then the loosened tooth is knocked out with a club and chisel. 
After this, the boys are shown a special image of Daramulun, instructed in 
their duties as men and told that the women must know nothing of what 
they have seen. Finally, they are taken and shown to the women, 
from whose charge they have now been removed, and then run off into 
the bush. 

In the second type, including those of Central Australia and the Queens- 
land tribes described by Roth, there are a succession of initiation ceremonies 
taking place at various ages. The Arunta may be taken as a type. We 
have — (1) the painting of the young boys and throwing them in the air, 
(2) the ceremony of circumcision, (3) that of sub-incision, and (4) the Engwura. 
In connexion with the second, the youths are shown the bull-roarer for the 
first time, the noise made by which the women and children believe to be the 
voice of Twanyirika, a spirit that takes the boys away, provides them with a 
new set of insides and makes them into men. In connexion with both 
(2) and (3), they are shown sacred totemic ceremonies and instructed in the 
laws, totemic history of the tribe, food restrictions and their duties as men ; 
they are told tbat they must implicitly obey the old men, must not eat the 
forbidden foods, but supply other men with them, and on no account must 
they talk to lubras about what they have seen. Everything is made as 
impressive as possible and the fact that the main ceremonies take place 
during the night, or just at daybreak, adds to the feeling of mystery. They 
have special designs painted on them, may not speak to any one save the old 
men in charge of them, are given very I'ttle food to eat, and pass through 
sundry very unpleasant experiences. For example, at various stages during the 
performance of kangaroo ceremonies, from four to ten men be down on the 
novice, who is expected to bear everything with stoicism. Finally, the 
men take about a dozen poles, each 8 feet high. Dry boughs are piled 
up to make a fire and, amidst the yells of the men, the women rush to their 
camp while bull-roarers sound all round. The novice is laid on his back 
and the poles placed above him and lifted up and down on him while the 
men sing. This over, he is carried, feet foremost, to where a man, kneeling 
in front of the operator, holds a shield on which he is placed and then, to the 
weird accompaniment of the bull-roarers, the Lartua song is thundered 
out and, in a moment or two, the operation is over. The initiated youth, 
completely dazed, after being embraced in turn by each of the older men 
who has taken an official part in the ceremony, is handed a bundle of churinga, 
and told, " Here is Twanyirika, of whom you have heard so much, take them, 
they are churinga and will help to heal you quickly, guard them well, do not 
lose them, do not let your mother and sisters see you, obey yom' elder brother, 
who goes with you, do not eat forbidden food." 

The final ceremony of Engwura, to which we have referred under the 
heading of totemism, is not passed through until a man is perhaps 25 or 30 years 



Aboriginals of Australia. 49 

old. It is most impressive and, after a man has passed through it, he is 
spoken of as " ertwa mura oknira," which means " very good man." As a 
matter of fact, every man must pass through all the initiation ceremonies, 
so that, amongst the elder men, there is no one who is not " ertwa mura 
oknira," but, on the other hand, there are grades of " goodness." Some men 
take less interest than others in the sacred ceremonies, they are given to 
chattering, like women and children and are " irkun oknira," that is, light 
and frivolous. Others take matters seriously and will, as they grow older, 
become leaders or oknirabata— great teachers. 

Special status names are applied as follows to the boy, youth and man at 
the times stated : — (1) Ambaquerka at the time of growing up, (2) Ulpmerka 
after this and until circumcision, (3) Wurtja during the ceremony, 
(4) Arakurta after the ceremony and until that of sub-incision, (5) Ertwakurka 
after this and until the Engwura, (6) Uliara after the latter. As in the 
Kurnai, so in all tribes, the women take an active part in the opening 
ceremonies but are rigidly excluded from the essential parts when a bull-roarer 
is used. There is usually some special ceremony symbolic of the fact that the 
boy is being withdrawn from the ranks of the women. It is not necessary 
here to refer to the initiation ceremonies of the women, but such exist in all 
central tribes and in those described by Roth, and probably, at one time, 
existed universally. 

The third type includes various coastal tribes that are evidently much 
modified. A characteristic group of these inhabits the Coburg Peninsula, the 
.VUigator River district and the coast as far as Darwin. A still more modified 
group inhabits Melville and Bathurst Islands. The former have a remarkable 
series of ceremonies associated with initiation, all of them totemic in 
character. There is no tooth knocking out nor any mutilation of the body. 
In the Kakadu, a special ground called " ober " is made, and on this totemic 
ceremonies are shown to the novices, who are given the usual instructions. 
Like the Arunta, there are various grades, the last of which is not passed 
through until a man is old, when he is allowed to take part in the Muraian 
ceremony, during which various objects symbolic of the totems are used. 
In the Kakadu there are apparently no bull-roarers shown ; but in the 
Larakia, at Darwin, they are shown to the young men at one stage, when 
three or four old men suddenly emerge from the bush and whirl them in front 
oi the novices. The latter stand in a row, and the old men, coming right up 
to them, point the bull-roarers at thena, then pull them through their own 
armpits, and insert them in those of the novices. At other stages the novices 
are subjected to rough treatment, such even as being kicked and hit hard, 
and during those unpleasant performances they must not grumble or find 
fault. On Melville Island, the novices are shown a special yam ceremony, 
during which all the men, women and children are gathered together in a 
camp, where ceremonies are performed and the yams cooked and eaten in a 
special way. The novices are also taken to a water-hole, where those wlio 
are passing through for the first time have their heads placed in bark baskets 
and dipped under water, while those who have reached the second stage 
are cauglit hold of by the arms and legs and pulled violently backwards and 
forwards through the water. Amongst these tribes girls of corresponding 
status to the youths aie specially decorated and take ]r.ivt in the coroinonies, 

C,121i-)4. i> 



50 Federal Handbook. 



and tliere is, at all events, one special ceremony, not as yet understood, 
tkrough which the older novices must pass. This is possibly the equivalent 
of the Muraian amongst the Kakadu. 

All the various types of initiation ceremonies for men agree in certain 
fundamental points : — 

(1) They begin at the age of puberty. 

(2) During the initial ceremonies the women play an important 
part. 

(3) During the essential parts the women are typically absent and the 
youths are shown the bull-roarer, have the secret beliefs explained to them 
and are instructed in the moral precepts and customs, including food 
restrictions, that they must henceforth observe under severe penalties. 

(4) At the close of the first part of the ceremonies, such as that of tooth 
knocking out or circumcision, a definite performance is enacted, emblematic 
of the fact that the youths have passed out of the control of the 
women. 

(5) The last grade is not passed through until a man is quite 
mature. 

5. Beliefs in Reincarnation and Spirit Children. 

The belief in reincarnation is very firmly held by all the central tribes 
from the Urabunna in the south right across the continent to those inhabiting 
the Coburg Peninsula on the northern coast line. In the Arunta tribe, the 
natives believe that in the far past times their ancestors, who were endowed 
with powers much superior to those of their living representatives, wandered 
across the country. They were divided into groups, kangaroo men and 
women in one, witchetty grub people in another, emu people in another, 
and so on. The track followed by each group is well known and, when 
they halted at various places, some of them went into the gi'ound, their 
spirit parts remaining above, each of them in company with a churinga. 
The whole Arunta country is thus dotted over with local centres — one 
haunted by kangaroo, another by grub spirits, and so on. At the present 
day it is these spirit children who are continually undergoing reincarnation. 
Each spirit has associated with it another, called Arumbui'inga, which is 
its double and always remains outside, living at the old camping ground 
of the spirit when the latter is reincarnated. Many of the more important 
of these old ancestors are known by name, and the old men decide the 
particular one of whom any child is the reincarnation. If the latter be 
known, the child bears the name of the ancestor. This name, however, 
is not used in public, it is secret, and known only to the old men of the 
totemic gi'oup. The individual himself only hears it when he is fully grown, 
and it is never mentioned except in whispers. When a child is born one or 
two of the old men actually go out in search of the churinga. Sometimes 
they find it, sometimes they do not, in which event they make a new one, 
so that each individual is represented by his churinga in the local storehouse 
called ertnatulunga. A woman going into the vicinity of one of these 
places is always liable to be entered by one of the spirit children. Whenever 
also a native dies, his spirit goes back to its old camping ground and remains 
there until it chooses to be reincarnated. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 51 

In Queensland, Roth states that the TuUy River blacks believed that 
children result from one or other of four causes — (1) a woman sits over a 
fire on which she has roasted a piece of a fish (black bream) that has been 
given to her by her husband ; (2) she goes out hunting and catches a special 
bull frog ; (3) some man tells her to have a child ; or (4) she dreams that a 
child has gone inside her. The Cape Bedford blacks believe that spirit 
children enter the mother in the form of a curlew, if they be girls, and in 
that of a snake, if boys. If they hear the curlew whistling at night they say 
" Hallo, there is a child about." According to the Pennefather natives, 
a mythic being called Anjea makes children out of swamp mud and puts 
them in the mothers. He is never seen, but can be heard laughing in the 
scrub. 

In the Warramiinga tribe, each totemic group is supposed to have had 
one great ancestor who wandered over the country, performing ceremonies 
at different spots, where he left spirit children behind, and it is these who are 
now born again. So again in the Gnanji tribe there is just the same belief, 
but, in addition, if a man travels, spirit children from his own place may 
follow him up and go inside his wife. 

In the Kadaku tribe on the northern coast, the beliefs are very precise 
and detailed. There are supposed to have been a limited number of ancestors 
who deposited spirit children at different places. These have been continually 
undergoing reincarnation. In these tribes the names of all these people 
are known, and every individual now bears the name of one of them. When 
a man dies, his spirit part stays with his bones, after the mourning ceremonies 
are over, forming what is called a Yalrauru. This gives off a double of 
itself somewhat like the Arumburinga in the Arunta, but here called Iwaiyu. 
It is the latter that enters a woman and undergoes reincarnation. Later 
on again, the original Yalmuru, who watches over the man or woman during 
his or her lifetime, is supposed to become worn out, so that when the man 
dies the old Iwaiyii becomes the new Yalmuru, which in course of time 
produces a new Iwaiyu, and so on, generation after generation. 

In the Broome district in Western Australia, according to Mrs. Bates, 
the natives believe that every child must be " dreamed " by its father, and 
the " dream-baby " is called Ngargarula. If the latter does not appear to 
the father, and his wife gives birth to a child, the father does not believe that 
the child belongs to him. If, on the other hand, a man is separated from 
his wife for a long time, and, while he is away, a Ngargarula comes to him 
and his wife has a child, he believes this belongs to him, no matter how 
long a time he may have been separated from his wife. These ideas in regard 
to reincarnation and the origin of children have now been shown to be very 
widely spread over Australia and were, doubtless, once held l)y tribes who 
are now much too decadent to retain beliefs of this nature, which are naturally 
amongst the first to be discarded when the aboriginal comes into contact 
with civilization. 

6. Beliefs in Superior Beings. 

All over Australia the natives appear to have beliefs in B(ung.s who are 
endowed with powers superior to their own. The following is a very brief 
outline of the summary given by T)r. Howitt in regard to the tril)es of th*? 

I» 2 



52 Federal Handbook. 



south-eastern part of the continent. In the Narrinyeri Tribe there was 
A Being called Nurrundere, who was supposed to have made everything 
ivnd to have instituted their rites and ceremonies. The Wotjoballuk spoke 
of Bunjil as " our father " and the Kulin people believed that he was an old 
man with two wives, taught them the arts of life and divided the tribe into 
intermarrying groups. In the Kurnai, Bunjil was a great Being, all knowledge 
of whom was confined to the men. The Kamilroi looked on Baiame as the 
Being who created all things. Amongst the Yuin people Daramulun is sup- 
posed to have instituted the ceremonies and made the bull-roarer. He 
lived in the sky, watching the men. His name is only used by the initiated. 
In parts of Queensland they believe in Kohin who lives in the Milky Way, 
roams about at night as a warrior, killing all natives he meets, and who is also 
offended if they do not keep the customs. According to Mr. Mathew, the 
Kabi and Wakka tribes believed in Beings such as Bind, Jonjari and Dhakkan, 
who was identified with the rainbow and lived in deep water holes. He 
could shatter mountains, slaughter natives and was at times malignant. 
He substituted half-caste for pure-bred children, so he was called warang, 
that is, wicked. 

Dr. Howitt sums up the legends and teachings, so far as the south-eastern 
tribes are concerned, as follows : — " I see, as the embodied idea, a venerable, 
kindly, headman of a tribe, full of knowledge and tribal wisdom and all 
powerful in magic, of which he is the source, with virtues, failings and 
passions, such as the aborigines regard them." 

In the Central tribes there is everywhere a belief in the former existence 
of ancestors endowed with powers superior to those of living natives. In 
addition there are other Beings. The Arunta believe that long ago there 
were two, called Ungambikula, which means " made out of nothing." They 
lived in the sky and came down and made men and women and then they 
turned into lizards. The Arunta also believed in the existence of mischievous 
spirits, called Oruncha, who are always ready to injure natives, but they 
have no great spirit such as Baiame. They have a mythical Being called 
Twanyirika, the equivalent of whom is found in other tribes, who is supposed 
by the women and children to take the boys away at initiation and provide 
them with new " insides " and whose voice is heard when the bull-roarer 
sounds. The men, however, tell the youths that the sound is made by the 
roarers. There is a belief amongst the Kaitish tribe in a Being called Atnatu. 
He made himself, the stars are his wives and he has plenty of sons and 
daughters. Long ago he was angry with his children, so he dropped them 
down on earth and, with them, everything the natives now have. If he 
hears the bull-roarers sound he is pleased, but if not he is angry. The 
Binbinga on the Gulf of Carpentaria believe that there are two malignant 
spirits c died Mundagadji, anxious to hurt them, and a friendly one, named 
Ulurkura, who lives in the woods and stops the Mundagadji. 

Speaking generally it may be said that every tribe has a belief of some 
kind in Superior Beings ; that, with rare exceptions, the latter are not sup- 
posed to take any personal interest in the natives or to be pleased or dis- 
pleased with what they do ; that no appeal for help is ever made to them, 
and that they have nothing whatever to do with the inculcation of moral 
precepts. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 5,^ 

7. Magic and Medicine Men. 

It is difficult to overstate the extraordinary part that, in one way or 
another, magic plays in a native's life. From the moment that he is born 
until he dies he lives in an atmosphere of magic. There are two sides to 
magic, the evil and the good and, of the two, the former bulks more largely 
in the native mind. Of good magic we have, on the one hand, ceremonies 
such as those in which, for example, a man of the Yam totem will take one 
of his yam chm-inga, "sing" it and then deposit it on ground where yams are 
usually found, with the idea that he can thereby make them grow. On 
the other, we have magic called into existence to counteract evil magic. 
In some tribes any man, or even women, may perform evil magic, in others 
the power is confined to the medicine men, as is also, in all tribes, the exercise 
of curative magic. First of all, we will deal with the medicine men. There 
are various ways in which they are made. Sometimes an old medicine 
man will initiate a young man, but, more often, they are supposed to be 
made by supernatural beings of some kind and in most, if not all, cases 
the medicine man has in his body something in the form of small crystals 
which are the seat of his '" virtues" and can be projected into the body of 
the patient in whom, as the case may be, they may either cause trouble or 
counteract evil magic implanted by some other individual. The medicine 
men also communicate with the spirits and it is they only who can withdraw 
"' poison bones and sticks." They often fly into the sky during the night, 
visiting hostile camps, inserting bones and sticks into enemies and sometimes, 
by means of invisible ropes, can climb up and down between earth and sky. 
Some even are strong enough to ward ofE evil magic from a whole tribe. 
At the time of the 1901 comet, a powerful Kaitish medicine man saved the 
whole tribe from destruction by night after night " singing " the comet's 
tail, and preventing the spears, of which it was made, from being hurled 
on to the Kaitish country. 

The commonest form of evil magic is associated with pointing bones 
and sticks (Fig. 17). A typical form is described by Roth under the name 
of Munguni and may be taken as representative of this form of magic in 
Australia. The instrument used consists of a short pointed bone attached 
to a string that passes into and through a little hollow receptacle, made of 
bone or wood, and out at the opposite end which is closed. When in use 
the receptacle is held in one hand and the bone pointed towards the victim, 
who may be miles away. A double action takes place, some of the victim's 
blood is drawn into the receptacle, where it is sealed up and, at the same 
time, evil magic passes out to the victim. To kill the latter, the receptacle 
with its contents may be burned, but, just to keep the victim ill, it may be 
warmed every now and then. He will never recover until it has l)een 
thoroughly well rinsed out. 

Another characteristic form is associated with an (jbject called Tchintu. 
It is only a small lump of resin with two teetli in it, and a long string attached, 
but by being " sung " the heat of the sun can be drawn into it and then, 
if it be placed in the tracks of any one, the heat follows the victim up, enters 
his body and kills him. 

Some of the most potent forms of magic are associated with hair cut 
from the l)ndies of the dead. They are used on avenging [jarties (Fig. 17)., 



54 Federal Handbook. 



and both endow the wearer with strength and accuracy of aim and, at the 
same time, render the victim powerless. Another favomite and wide-spread 
practice is that of " taking the kidney fat." This is usually done by hostile 
medicine men. In the Wotjoballuk tribe in Victoria, the latter sneaks on 
the sleeping victim. He carries a magic bone with a noose attached to it. 
He may either project the bone into his victim, which action compels him 
to come out to the medicine man, who then throws him over his shoulder 
and carries him off, or, if the medicine man happens to be in camp with his 
victim, he passes the bone under the knees of the latter when he is asleep, 
round his neck and through the noose, rendering him helpless. In any 
case, the victim is oblivious of what takes place. The medicine man opens 
the right side of his victim just below the ribs and abstracts the fat, which 
may be eaten or rubbed on weapons. The wound is " sung" and the sides . 
bitten together in such a way that no scar is left. The victim wanders back 
to camp but soon dies. No medicine man can cure one whose kidney fat 
has been extracted but he can determine, or even the patient himself may, 
who is the guilty one. Any medicine man can withdraw bones and objects 
of magic generally, and is always called in when a patient is ill. It must 
be remembered that no native believes in illness except as the result of evil 
magic, and magic from a distance is always potent. A pain is caused by 
some concrete thing that must be removed from the body and the method 
of procedure is very much the same in all tribes. The patient lies down, 
the medicine man comes up and gazes fixedly upon him, as often as not 
projecting some of his magic crystals into him to act as an antidote. Then, 
after prolonged sucking and massage, he will, perhaps, but only if he be a 
very gifted practitioner, withdraw the poison bone or stick whole ; in most 
cases it is removed bit by bit (Fig. 18). Then, unseen by any one, his magic 
crystals retm-n to his body. 

It is difficult to estimate how far the medicine men believe in themselves. 
They must know that, to a certain extent, they are frauds, though it is 
wonderful what they can persuade themselves to believe, and the truth 
probably is that, while each individual knows that he himself cannot do 
everything that he pretends to, yet he firmly believes that other men can. 

8. Ceremonies Associated with Death and Burial. 

Death is always supposed to be due to evil magic and may be brought 
about in various ways. Very often a bone, or stick, is sung and pointed 
in the direction of the victim whom its evil magic then enters. In some 
tribes a ceremony is performed with the object of catching the double of 
the man's spirit, without whose friendly guidance he meets with an accident 
(Fig. 19). Death is always a source of fear to natives, because in many 
cases it means not only that there is some evil spir't or magic influence 
at work, but also the spirit of the dead person is hovering about. It is 
customary to shift camp the moment a death occurs and in all tribes there 
are special ceremonies that must be carried out. They vary much, and 
are regarded as of great importance. I will describe the main points of 
those in the Arunta tribe, and afterwards note important features in those 
of other tribes. First of all, the deceased's hair is cut off and made into 
a special girdle, to be subsequently worn by a man who avenges the death 



Aboriginals of Australia. 




a < 



O 1:^ 



t3 S 

o 







C. 12154. 



56 



Federal Handbook. 




5 = 



5 3 




« 



Aboriginals of Australia. 



57 





o 



58 



Federal Handbook. 





Aboriginals of Australia. 



5*> 




60 



Federal Handbook. 




Aboriginals of Australia. 



61 




S - 



- t3 



< O 




S <J 



i^ 



20 



62 



Federal Handbook. 




Aboriginals of Australia. 



63 




64 



Federal Handbook. 




Fig. Iti. — 1. Stoxe Churixga. 2. Wooden Churinga. 3. Opossum Lower Jaw 
WITH Incisor Teeth, used for Graving. 4. Opossum Jaw hafted to form 
A Graving Tool. 




Fig. 17, — Objects of Magic — ^1, 2, 3, 4. .'>. Various Forms of Pointing Bones and 
Sticks. 6, 7, 8. Necklets containing Hair cut from a dead Man. 9. Bret. 
A Dead Hand, which vibrates to indicate approaching danger — Kurnai Tribe, 
10. Dead Man's Arm Bone, used on Avenging Expedition. 11. Tikovina, worn 
DURING Fight by the Natives of the Herbert River, Queensland. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 



65 



^r 





66 



Federal Handbook. 




^"^'^.XS 



■^ 




Aboriginals of Australia. 



67 




68 



Federal Handbook. 




Fig. 21. — Tree Bukiai, : Raking the Boxes erom the Pi.ateor.m- 
Tribe, Central Australia. 



-Wakramu.vga 



Aboriginals of Australia. 



69 




Fig. 22. — Flaked Knife with Resin and Wood Hafting, and Case Tipped with 

Inverted Emx: Feathers. 






\ 





^^^ 



Fig. 23. — Flaked and ('iiii'imh I'icks, Central Australia. 



70 



Federal Handbook. 




Fig. 24. — Implements with Cutting Flakes — 1, 2, 3, 4. Gouges ob Adzes. 
5, 6. Spear Throwers — Central Australia. 




Fig. 25. — Ground and Hafted Stone Axes — 1, 2. Warramuxga Trire, Northern 
Territory. 3, 4. Kakadu Tribe, Northern Territory. . New South Wales. 
6. Queensland. 



Aboriginals of Ai'stralia. 



71 




Fig. 26. — Grixdi.xg Stone- — Xew South Wales. 
(This stone has been used for grinding on both sides.) 




Fio. 27. — SifiELos — 1. West Au.stualia. 2. Cardwell, Queensland. 3. Central 
Australia. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Interior ok New South Wales. 



0121.54. 



72 



Federal Handbook. 




Fit:. 28. — Western Australian Shields and Spear Throwers. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 



73 




74 



Federal Handbook. 




Aboriginals of Australia. 75 

(Fig. 17). It is filled with magic. The body is buried in the ground in 
a sitting position with the knees doubled up against the chin, the earth being 
piled up to make a low mound with a depression on one side to allow of ingress 
and egress of the spirit. The camp is burnt down and in the case of a woman 
everything is destroyed. No person may mention the deceased's name during 
the period of mom-ning ; if any one does, the spirit hears, thinks they are 
not mourning properly and is angry. No elder brother, father, mother, 
elder sister, father's sister, wife's mother, wife's mother's brother, father's 
brother, mother's sister, husband's mother, or husband's mother's brother 
may ever mention the name. In the case of a man, those who might legally 
be his sons-in-law neither mention the name, attend the funeral, nor take 
pxrt in the ceremonies, but they must cut their shoulders. The actual 
widow or widows paint themselves with pipe-clay, and are called Inpirta, 
which means " the whitened one." To remove the silence ban a widow 
gathers seed, places it in a vessel, summons the other women and with them 
goes to the centre of the encampment, where they all sit down and wail. 
The sons and younger brothers approach, take the vessel in the'r hands, 
and shout " wah, wah," the widow joining in. The vessel, after being 
held close to the widow's face, is taken away by the men, who strike their 
shields on the ground in front of the widow, who may now speak. The 
ceremony shows that she is about to resume her ordinary life. Later on 
she will become the wife of one of the younger brothers. At least a year 
after death the ceremony of Urpmilchima — " trampling the twigs on the 
grave " — is performed. The widow smears herself over with pipe-clay and, 
wearing a chaplet made of clusters of small bones that hang down over her 
face, accompanies the other men and women first to her late husband's 
camp and then to the grave, which they approach yelling, so as to drive the 
spirit ahead and into the ground. After much cutting and w.iiling, the 
chaplet is broken and bur'ed in the grave, by the side of which the widow 
rubs the pipe-clay off and her mourning is over. The spirit sees that it 
has been properly mourned for and returns to its ancestral home, where 
it lives until it undergoes reincarnation. 

In the Warramunga, the body is placed on a platform of boughs in a 
tree (Fig. 21). When the bones are clean they are all raked out, the skull 
is smashed and, with the exception of one arm bone, they are buried in an 
ant hill. The arm bone is brought into camp and handed over to a 
mother of the dead person. Finally it is broken in two at the close of 
a ceremony connected with the totem of the deceased atid buried in the 
ground. 

In the Boulia district in Queensland, tlie body is buried in the ground, 
placed lengthwise on its back. Logs are laid on it, the earth filled in, and a 
small circular mound, 3 or 4 feet liigh, of logs, earth, stones and leafy branches 
is built ; the ground around being cleared. The men and women cut them- 
selves and, on return to camp, plaster their heads over with pipe-clay and 
paint the upper part of their bodies. 

In the Mara, Binbinga, and other tribes on the west side of the Gulf of 
Carpentaria, the body is first of all placed in a tree. When clean, the bones 
are brouglit into camp and placed in a coffin made of a hollow log, ornamented 
with a design emblematic of the totem of the deceased. This is then 



76 Federal Handbook. 



deposited by the side of a lily pool and is supposed to make the lilies grow. 
In these, and many other tribes, the flesh of a dead person is eaten ; in 
most cases, probably by certain relatives. 

On Melville and Bathurst Islands the body is buried in the ground. 
At a later period, grave posts, to the number of twelve or more, are 
erected at intervals of time. The natives gather together and, after dancing 
round a fire at which they must singe themselves, they rush to the grave, 
throwing their spears ahead to drive the spirit on and down into the ground. 
Then they perform dances around the grave posts, in which men, women and 
children take part, after which the spirit is supposed to remain quiet. 

In every case there are certain individuals who must paint themselves 
so as to be prominent, the idea evidently being that the spirit will see them 
and recognise that it has been properly mourned for. In most cases also 
the women, such as widows and sisters of the dead man, are not allowed 
to speak for a certain period after the death. 

9. Weapons and Implements. 
(a) Stone Implements. 

In 1891, Mr. R. Etheridge published the outline of a classification of 
stone implements,* and during recent years Mr. A. S. Kenyon has very 
largely extended the scope of the work.f It is not too much to say that 
at the present time we can parallel amongst Australian stone weapons all 
the types known in Europe under the names Chellean, Moustierian, Aurig- 
nacian, etc. We also have the great advantage that we can still, in some 
of the far back parts, though very rarely now, see the natives making and 
using their stone implements. The terms Eolithic, Paleolithic, and Neolithic. 
do not apply in Australia as indicating either time periods or levels of culture. 
Natives, not only in different parts of Australia, but in the same part, wil 
use contemporaneously implements that, if they were found in prehistoric 
deposits, would be regarded as belonging to different stages of culture. 
Everything is, in the main, a matter of the material available. If the 
native lives in quartzite country, he makes chipped or flaked implements, 
some coarsely manufactured for temporary use, others carefully and often 
beautifully shaped. If he lives where he can get diorite, then he grinds 
his tools ; and, if he lives where he can get material suitable both for grindinr; 
and flaking, then he makes tools which if found " fossil " would be called 
either Paleolithic or Neolithic ; the rougher ones, indeed, would be called 
Eolithic or rejected as non-human by those who have never seen a native 
using a pebble that he has very roughly flaked to serve some temporar^' 
purpose. When they are in camp, for example, performing their ceremonies, 
some of which requn-e the cutting of a vein, a man will simply take from 
the ground any pebble that lies handy, and with another will strike off I'ttle 
flakes until he secures one with a sharp edge and with this will cut his vein 
open. If at the present day a European archaeologist were to search amongst 
the belongings of, say, a Warramunga man in Central Australia, he would, 
unless prepared for it, be astonished to find that the native possessed, and 
continually used, a ground stone axe, a flaked or perhaps chipped and flaked 

* Kenyon and Stirling. Proc. R.S. Vict., 1901, Pt. 2, p. 191. 

t R. Etheridge, Jr. Proc. Linn. Soc, N.S.W. Vol. VI., Pt. 3. 1891. p. 157. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 77 

axe or pick, a flaked knife, hafted with resin or with resin and wood, and, at 
the same time, chipped stones quite as rude as, and indeed indistinguishable 
from, those of the old Tasmanians. It is this constant mixture of imple- 
ments, usually regarded as belonging to different levels of culture, that 
forms the most striking feature of the present stone age in Australia. The 
nature and form of the implements is not a question of the stage of culture, 
but depends primarily upon the material available. 

Without going into detail it may be said that the stone implements of 
the natives may be divided into three groups. 

(1) Cutting Implements. 

(a) Cutting edge produced by flaking or chipping, or both. 
(6) Cutting edge produced by grinding. 

These include axes, knives, adzes, and spear heads. On the one hand, 
they vary in form from the crudest chip or pebble, roughly flaked on one side 
so as to form an axe, to the delicate, leaf-like, jasper spear heads, indistin- 
guishable from those made by the most highly cultured Neolithic people 
in Europe. On the other, they may be roughly chipped pebbles or blocks 
of stone, just showing the faintest trace of grinding, or they may be beautifully 
ground and polished with a keen sharp-cutting edge. It is, however, only 
in very exceptional cases that the whole surface is ground. In some cases 
they may be held in the hand and show a well marked " finger grip," but 
in others they may be hafted with the aid of resin and wood in various ways 
too detailed to describe here (Figs. 22, 23, 21, 25). 

(2) Grinding Implements. 

These may take the form of large kerns or mills, the nether stone being 
formed of a slab of sandstone hollowed out, often on both sides, with con- 
tinuous grinding until the central crust becomes so thin that it breaks through ; 
in some cases, as for the purpose of grinding ochre, any flat stone may be 
used (Fig. 26). 

(3) Pounding Implements. 

These take the form of lower stones or pestles, always with a pounding 
or husking hole, and of upper stones used as hammers. 
In addition to these main groups we may add another — 

(4) Miscellaneous. 
These includes such t)bjects as playing stones, sinkers attached to 
nets, etc. 

(b) Weapons and Implements other than Stone Ones. 

It would be futile to attempt more than the merest sketch of a description 
of these. They can be seen in the museum collections and attention is 
drawn here only to certain characteristic implements and features concerned 
with them. The most characteristic weapon is the boomerang, which does 
not appear to have been known to the Tasmanians. There are various 
forms of the implement, some, large and heavy, being used for fighting at close 
quarters, others for fighting and throwing at game, and others, often called 



78 Federal Handbook. 



play boomerangs, that possess the characteristic feature of returning to a 
skilled thrower. There is a remarkable resemblance in the general form 
between a boomerang and the long, thin, curved leaf of many Eucalyptus. 
The missile always consists of a flattened curved blade, usually flat on one 
side and slightly convex on the other. The property of returning appears 
to be associated with a very slight twist, the weapon rotating during its 
passage through the air. A skilful thrower can make one describe flrst a 
large circle and then one or two smaller ones before it falls at his feet. It 
must be remembered, however, that the return boomerang is only met with 
in very restricted areas in Australia. In many, the curve is a wide open one, 
but there are all grades between a very slight curve and one in which the 
blade is divided into two parts almost at right angles to one another. In 
some cases, one end of a boomerang is fashioned to serve as a handle. 
Starting with an ordinary round, straight, throwing stick, a series can be 
traced leading up through a curved throwing stick, circular in section, to one 
elliptical in section, then on to a throwing stick slightly flattened and so 
to the ordinary curved boomerang with one side flat, the other slightly 
convex. From this typical weapon we can branch ofi along three lines, 
one leading to the highly specialized " return " boomerang, a second 
to a boomerang with one end slightly enlarged, and so on to the curved 
club-like missile called " lil-lil" and to the "beaked boomerang," while 
a third line leads through one of ordinary size, with one end fashioned to 
form a handle, on to the unwieldy so-called " sword " met with in Queens- 
land. 

There are endless varieties of clubs and spears, all made of wood, with, in 
the case of the latter, barbs or blades of wood, bone, or stone. Most of them 
have a concavity at the handle end, into wliich fits the knob of a spear- 
thrower, but both the very light cane ones, with simple sharp wooden points, 
and the great javelins of the Melville Islanders, are thrown by the hand. 
The spear-thrower is a very characteristic Australian weapon. It may be only 
a rounded stick with a knob of resin at one end, 2 or 3 feet long, or it may be 
leaf-shaped and either flat or decidedly concave, and used for other 
purposes as well as throwing. The Arunta thrower has a small wooden 
knob at one end, tied on with sinew, and at the handle end a lump of resin, 
into which is fixed a sharp, cutting flint. Dm'ing ceremonies, it serves to 
hold a supply of blood, down and ochre ; at other times it serves as an 
adze, gouge or chisel. Altogether it forms one of the most useful 
implements that the native has. 

Some of the most ingenious and useful implements are wooden troughs 
or pitchis and baskets that are used for carrying food and water. The 
former are fashioned out of solid logs cut from gum trees, or, when such is 
available, from soft wood, such as that of the bean tree. The perfect 
symmetry and shape of the hardwood troughs and the regularity with which 
the concave lines, made by the cutting flint, run parallel to one another 
along the length of the trough is wonderful. The simpler baskets may be 
made out of palm or pandanus leaves, or sheathing stalks ingeniously folded 
over. Others are made from sheets of stringybark, stripped from a gum tree 
during the wet season. Others, again, are made of plaited grass or of string, 
so closely netted that the bags will hold fluid. The most remarkable baskets 



Aboriginals of Australia. 71^ 

are undoubtedly those made from split cane, with the two lower ends pointed 
and upturned. The symmetry of these, which are only made in Queensland, 
is extraordinary. 

Shields vary much (Fig. 27). They may be made of soft or hard wood 
and the handle carved out of the solid or inserted separately. For the most 
part they are broad, but, in the south-east of the continent, a narrow one was 
used to ward off the blows of clubs. The surface of the shield lends itself to 
decoration. Sometimes this takes the form of incised patterns, but, more 
often, apart from the concave lines made by the flint, the design is due to 
pigment. Attention may be drawn to the massive shields with bold design, 
found only in parts of Queensland. 

The native is very clever in making string, for which purpose he uses 
human hair, fur of different animals, shredded leaves, such as those of the 
pandanus, or bark of different trees. He may simply use one hand to " serve " 
the material and the other to rub it on his thigh, or he may employ a very 
simple spindle. So admirably is the string made, that, at a casual glance, 
it appears just the same as a white man's, but it can be distinguished by the 
fact that native twine is seldom more than two-ply, while the white man's 
is seldom less than three. It is used for various purposes, the most important 
being, perhaps, the making of nets and bags. Some of the larger fishing nets 
measure 70 feet in length by 7 in width. 

Clothing and ornament vary very much in different tribes. In the south- 
east and west of the continent kangaroo skins are used, sewn together and 
often decorated with coloui'ed patterns on the inside (the fur being on the 
outside) to form very efficient rugs. In the central and northern parts, the 
only clothing consists of a more or less efficient apron, usually like a great 
tassel suspended from a waist girdle. In the very centre it degenerates in 
size and may, on the men, be more an ornament than a covering. It is 
remarkable that the central natives have not invented clothing:, because 
kangaroos are often abundant and the nights in winter are bitterly cold. 
On Melville and Bathurst Islands the women wear an efficient apron made 
of paper bark, the men are stark naked. Ornaments in the form of head 
bands of flattened-out or netted strands of string, tufts of white cockatoo 
feathers, emu feathers, or waist girdles of gaily coloured parakeet feathers 
are often worn, and, speaking generally, it may be said that it is the men and 
not the women who usually decorate themselves. 

10. Decorative Art. 

The decorative art of Australian natives, so far as their weapons and 
implements are concerned, is gener.illy remarkable for the almost entire absence 
of design suggested by natural objects. In south-eastern Australia we meet 
with shields, etc., ornamented with conventionalized animal drawings, but 
they are so uncommon as to attract attention at once. In his rock and 
bark drawings the native will depict animals and plants, but, for the most 
part, the ornamentation of implements and sacred objects alike consists of 
conventional designs. The Australian aljoriginal appears to have been but 
little influenced, artistically, by his natural surroundings. Owing to lack 
of material, he is restricted to a few colours. Red ochre that can be mixed 
with pipe-clay to produce varying shades, yellow ochre and charcoal are his 



80 Federal Handbook. 



three mainstays. Here and there he may have something like " wad," an 
oxide of manganese, that gives a pearl-grey colour when powdered. It is 
very doubtful if blue is ever used by the Australian in his native state, though 
he soon adopts it in contact with white men. 

A very striking feature of his decorative art is the use that he makes of 
down derived either from birds or from the involucral hairs of different plants. 
He mixes it with red ochre or pipe-clay, never, cm-iously, with yellow. With 
the aid of such materials he produces simple, bold designs of circles, spirals, 
and symmetrically curved lines, showing an appreciation of strong contrasts, 
such as are offered by black or red circles, spiral and curved bands outlined 
by white dots. So far as the nature of the designs is concerned, we can 
divide them into tliree series — zoomorphs, phytomorphs, and geometrical. 
From another point of view, they may be divided into two series — first, what 
we may call ordinary, and, secondly, sacred designs. We will deal with them 
under these two aspects. 

(a) Ordinary Designs. 

In regard to the method of production of these, there are three well- 
marked types. 

(1) Incision hy means of a Sharp Stone, Tooth, Bone, or Shell. 

The simplest ornamentations have the form of finer or coarser grooviugs 
that run parallel to the length of implements, such as pitchis, shields, and 
boomerangs. These do not necessarily give rise to a pattern. In olden days 
the tribes on the Murray River and in various parts of the coastal districts 
of New South Wales and Victoria made very elaborate shields with incised 
designs representing animals. Their spear-throwers were ornamented in the 
same way. Very characteristic, indeed, is the zig-zag incised pattern on 
Western Australian shields and spear throwers (Fig. 28). In some cases 
concentric squares are cut on weapons and corroboree tablets. In some 
parts of Australia, more especially in New South Wales, trees near to a 
grave were ornamented on one side or all round, for many feet from the 
ground, with deeply cut designs, some of which may, perhaps, be totemic in 
significance. Occasionally incised drawings are made on rocks, as in the case 
nf the large drawings of animals described by Mr. Etheridge on the coast 
near Sydney. 

(2) Burning the Surface with a Fire-stick. 

This is not a frequent form of ornamentation, and is only used in the 
case of " pointing sticks." In the central area it is very characteristic of 
these. It takes the form of a series of spiral lines, circles, notches, or dots. 

(3) Painting a Surface with Pigment. 

This is by far the most common method of ornamentation, and may 
be treated under three heads — (a) drawings on weapons and implements, 
(b) drawings on human bodies, and (c) drawings on the ground, rocks, and 
bark. 

{a) In many cases it is customary to coat almost every weapon with ochre. 
In some cases, weapons, such as boomerangs, shields, spears, dilly-bags, 
knives, and fighting clubs have special designs. It would be tedious to go 



Aboriginals op Australia. 



81 




Fig. 31. 



Map of Australia showing approximately the Distribution of 
THE various Groups of Tribes. 



Tribes with Maternal Descent and the moiety names Kirara and Matteri or their 

equivalents. JU^XjI^-^^^^ 
Tribes with Maternal Descent and the moiety names Mukwarra and Kulpara or their 

equivalents. 

Tribes with Maternal Descent and the moiety names Utaru and Pakuta or their 

equivalents. 
Tribes with Maternal Descent and the moiety names Utaru and Maieru or their 

equivalents. 
Tribes with Maternal Descent and the Kamil£ai organization. 
Tribes with Maternal Descent and the moiety names Gamutch and Krokiteh. 
Small group of Tribes with Maternal Descent and moiety names wliich were said 

to stand for Eaglehawk and Crow. Very little was known of them before they 

became extinct. 
Tribes with Paternal Descent and the Southern Arun ta organization. They probably 

extend right across the centre and over a much larger area of West Australia 

than indicated. 

Tribes with Paternal Descent and the Warramunga organization. (It'^cc^^'^^ 

Tribes with direct Paternal Descent and the Mara organization. 

The Kulin group of Tribes with Paternal Descent and the two divisions Bunjil and 
Wang. 

The Kurnai Tribe with Paternal Descent. 

The Kakadu group of Tribes with no class orgo,nization. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 83 



into detail and the reader is referred to the works of Etheridge, Roth, 
Stirling, Spencer and Gillen, Brough Smyth, and others. Attention may. 
however, be drawn to the zig-zag designs of Western Australia, to the bold 
decorative schemes on the large Queensland shields, to the carefully drawn 
designs on Queensland dilly-bags, where conventional designs are sometimes 
associated with zoomorphs, and also to the very characteristic and effective 
designs on the spears, throwing sticks, grave posts and, more especially, the 
large bark baskets of the Melville and Bathurst Islanders. The latter are 
different from any on the mainland. The various designs indicate considerable 
variations in artistic skill, but they all show that the native has a very distinct 
feeling for decorative effect. 

(b) The drawings on human bodies are done in red and yellow ochre, 
pipe-clay, charcoal. In some cases the designs are merely what the natives 
call " play-about," but the more important are associated with the perform- 
ance of corroborees. In almost all cases these are purely conventional 
designs of circles and lines that often follow the contoiu- of the body. Each 
corroboree has its own design (Figs. 11 and 12). 

(c) The drawings on rocks and bark are some of the most interesting 
and vary much. They may be zoomorphic, phytomorphic, or purely con- 
ventional designs, such, for example, as those from Central Australia described 
by Dr. Stirling, though the first two are more common than the third. 
In one of the zoomorphic ones, the spectator is supposed to be looking 
upwards from beneath an emu that is sitting on its eggs ; in others we have 
drawings of wild dogs, kangaroos, and various animals ; in others, of cycad 
fronds, while others are purely conventional, consisting of concentric circles 
of lines and dots. The " red hand," about which so much has been written, 
has no special significance. It is met with everywhere and is made by 
placing the hand on a rock or bark surface, and then silhouetting it by means 
of blowing red ochre on to the rock around it. Sometimes pipe-clay or 
charcoal is used, in which case we get, respectively, a white or black hand, 
but in no case, red, white, or black, has it any more significance than the 
outline of a fern made by a child squirting ink over the leaves. In some* 
cases, and more especially on the northern coastline, fairly elaborate drawings 
of animals and mythical objects are made on rocks or sheets of bark. The 
walls of rock shelters are covered over with often very suggestive, though 
crude, representations of the animals the natives feed upon — crocodiles, 
lizards, snakes, fishes, etc. — and sometimes also with quaint drawings of 
gnomes that inhabit the mangrove swamps and rocky ranges. By far the 
most elaborate rock paintings, however, are those first described by Grey, 
and later by Brockman, in the Kimberley district. They are, apparently, 
made by natives, but, in regaid to the presence of clothes, etc., clearl}^ show 
outside influence. 

(b) Sacred Designs. 

In many cases, at fii'st sight, these are not distinguishable from 
some of those already described, in fact, so far as conventional 
drawings such as concentric circles are concerned, as much depends 
on the location of the drawing as on its nature. In one spot a drawing 
will be sacred, in another if will not, but, whilst this is so, yet, on the 



84 Federal Handbook. 



whole, the sacred designs are well defined. They are best known in 
the central and northern tribes, amongst whom they are very well developed. 
In the Arunta, for example, every totem group has its Ilkinia, or totem 
design, which the men of the totem group may paint on themselves. In 
addition to this, right through the tribes, every separate totemic ceremony 
has a special design painted on the bodies of the performers, consisting of 
lines of red and white down that often closely cover the whole of the upper 
half of the body and face and extend upwards on to an elaborate headdress 
(Fig. 29). In every instance, the down is fixed on the body by blood drawn 
from the performers. The illustrations will give an idea of what these 
designs are like. In addition to them, some totemic groups have special 
designs drawn on rocks at places where churinga are stored and ceremonies 
performed. No women go there. Others have ground drawings of a very 
elaborate kind that can be best exemplified by the Wollunqua snake totem 
in the Warramunga tribe. Two of these will suffice. In one the sandy 
soil was smoothed down with water to make a firm flat surface, over which 
a coating of yellow ochre was spread. On this, five series of concentric 
circles were drawn, representing trees and water holes at the home of the 
Wollunqua. An 18-ft. long, sinuous band represented the snake itself, 
and footmarks by the side indicated those of an old man, its mate. The 
rest of the design consisted of white spots of pipe-clay that entirely 
surrounded the black bands. The main features were laid down by one 
old man, who drew the circles and sinuous line, using two of his fingers as 
a brush, without any mechanical aid. This done, he retired, and the 
dr^iwing was completed by younger men (Fig. 30). In the other, a 
mound, 15 feet long and 18 inches high, was made. It was covered with 
dots of pipe-clay that surrounded and outlined a sinuous band of red ochre 
along each side, representing the snake. Ground designs similar in signi- 
ficance, associated with sacred ceremonies, now exist, or once did, amongst 
many tribes on the eastern coast. 

Some of the more elaborate designs are those on objects worn or carried 
by men performing sacred ceremonies.* One such special object may be 
described, partly because it represents one of the most elaborate, and partly 
because the significance of its different constituents gives a good idea of one 
side of the native mind. It is called a Waninga, and is, or was, used in 
tribes round Lake Eyi'e, such as the Urabunna, and also in the southern 
Arunta. First of all, it is important to note that a Waninga used in a kangaroo 
ceremony, for example, represents a kangaroo, while a similar one used in a 
rain ceremony represents rain and things associated with it. To take a 
rain one : A strong spear, 10 feet long, forms a central shaft ; at right angles 
to its length and at a distance of 2 feet from either end, are two sticks, each 
3 feet long. Between the two, running parallel to the length of the spear, 
lines of human hair string are tightly strung. Each line takes a turn round 
the transverse bar at either end, then slants away to the spear, turns round 
this and then runs back to the bar, until the whole space between the bars 
is filled with close set bands of string with a triangular-shaped patch at each 
end, A band, 1^ inches wide, running round about the same distance within 

• As colour forms a very important element in these it is impossible to describe them adequately In 
words. A coloured plate of some of them, now in the National Museum, Melbourne, is given in 
" Northern Tribes of Central Australia," p. 722. 



Aboriginals of Australia. 85 

the margin, is made of opossum fur string, whitened with pipe-clay, the 
same width of string on the inside of it being red-ochered. Tufts of the 
red-barred tail feathers of the black cockatoo are tied to the tip of the spear 
and the ends of the bars. A number of bands of white down run in parallel 
lines across the strings. The man carrying the Waninga wears wood- 
parings on his head, smeared in blood. The red string represents thunder ; 
the white band, lightning ; the ordinary black string, rain falling ; the 
white down, clouds. Black cockatoo feathers are used because the call of 
these birds is always taken as an indication that there is a waterhole near. 
The red of the feathers and the blood-smeared wood parings represent the 
masses of dirty brown froth that float on flood waters. This Waninga is 
used during rain-making ceremonies, and serves not only as a good example 
of decorative art, but of the exercise of sympathetic magic. 



86 



Federal Handbook. 



CHAPTER III. 
THE PHYSICAL AND GENERAL GEOGRAPHY OF AUSTRALIA. 



By Griffith Taylor, B.Sc, B.E., B.A., F.G.S., Physiographer 
Commomvealth Bureau of Meteorology* 



the 



SYNOPSIS. 



1. General Structure. 

(a) Regional Geography. 

2. The Eastern Cordillera. 

{a) The Queensland Highlands. 

(b) The South-eastern Highlands 

IN New South Wales. 

(c) The Victorian Cordillera and 

ITS Coast Plains. 
{d) Tasmania. 

t?. The Lowland Belt of Australia. 

4. The Murray-Darling Lowlands. 

(a) Cobar-Wagga Peneplain. 

(b) The Western Plains and the 

RiVERINA. 

(c) The Ancient Murray Estuary. 

5. The Great Artesian Basin. 

(a) The Eastern or Pastoral 

Artesian Basin. 

(b) The Lake Eyre or Desert 

Artesian Basin. 



6. The South Australian Highlands 

AND the Associated Trough 
Faults. 

7. The Great Plateau Region. 

(a) The Tropical Region. 

i. The Northern Territory 

Lowlands. 
ii. The Northern Territory 

Uplands. 
iii. The North-west Region. 

(6) The Central or Desert Table- 
land. 
i. The Desert Proper. 
ii. The MacDonnell Ranges. 
iii. The Gold-fields Region. 

(c) The South-west Temperate 
Region. 
i. The Eastern Pastoral 

Belt. 
ii. The Central Wheat Belt. 
iii. The South-west Timber 
Region. 

8. Bibliography. 



1. — General Structure. 

Austr.ilia, the smallest continent, lies to the south-east of the chief land- 
mass of the globe, conveniently known as the Old World. Connected 
thereto by the partly submerged but high mountain ranges constituting 
the East Indian Archipelago it offers the strongest contrast to the latter in 
outline. In place of sporades of long narrow islands Australia presents 
perhaps the most unbroken outline of all the continents, and is certainly 
one of the lowest in elevation. 

Both these features are probably due to one factor — -the presence of a 
huge dense unmoving block in the earth's crust in the form of the West 
Australian horst. Against this comparatively low, resistant area the folding 
forces affecting the earth's crust have again and again advanced the crustal 
ripples to which most elevated land is due. Nor is it improbable that the 
massif itself in reaching equilibrium has exerted an outward puckering 

* By kind permission of the Delegates of the Clarendon Press. University of Oxford, the writer 
has abridged this account from his article in the forthcoming " O.xford Survey of the British Empire " to 
be published by that body. Mr. Taylor held the position of Senior Geologist in Captain Scott's 
Expedition. 

In the absence of Mr. Griffith Taylor in Englvnd, this chapter has been revised by Mr. D. J. Jlahony 
M-Sc. F.G.S., Geological Survey of Victoria. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 87 



force on the less solid sediments to the east. To this may be attributed the 
dominating direction of the north and north-west folds which occur in 
Australia, and which tend to lie in concentric lines about a centre near Cape 
Leeuwin* (see Plate V. in Chap. VII., The Geology of the Commonwealth). 
But, on the whole, Australia has been remarkably free from great 
folding forces in later geological times. Ordinary normal erosion by 
rivers and wind has been at work and has succeeded in wearing the greater 
portion of Australia to a uniform height of some 1,000-1,500 feet above 
sea level. 

Broadly speaking, there are no large areas of Tertiary deposits in 
Australia except the ancient Murray estuary. Since Cretaceous times there 
can have been no very important alterations in the surface of Australia as 
we know it, though undoubtedly as regards outline it then extended very 
much further to the south-east and east than at present. 

In position it is more isolated than any other large land mass excepting 
Antarctica. Taking as a standard of length the distance from London 
to Algiers (about 1,000 miles), the journey from Perth to Colombo is more 
than three times this unit ; and the same huge distance lies between Hong 
Kong and Thursday Island in the north of Queensland. Indeed, Java is 
the only large civilized area which is within a thousand miles of any portion 
of Australia. 

But Australia itself is a country of vast distances. It is 1,600 miles 
from Perth to Adelaide, the capital of the next State ; while in New South 
Wales to reach its third town (Broken Hill) from the capital (Sydney) a 
railway journey of some 1,400 miles {via Melbourne and Adelaide) is 
necessary. 

Australia, including Tasmania, has an area of 2,974,600 square miles 
approximately; and with the region of Papua (British New Guinea) which is 
administered by Australia, the total rises to about 3,065,100. 

The arrangement of the elevated areas in Australia is in close concordance 
with the structural principles indicated previously. 

Broadly speaking, Australia consists of three well-defined aiid contrasted 
areas — an ancient western plateau of 1,000-1,500 feet in height, and two 
eastern belts. The more central of these is a meridional belt of low-lying, 
level-bedded deposits (of Mesozoic age chiefly), while the eastern portion 
is a Cordillera forming a fairly complete bulwark barring out the Pacific 
Ocean from the central plains. 

(a) Regional Geography. 

In Australia the political boundaries are pre-eminently artificial. With 
the exception of one or two natural lines of demarcation — such as the River 
Murray — no natural inland features have been utilized. In these cir- 
cumstances it is felt to be preferable to consider the geography of Aus- 
tralia in terms of its chief natural regions, not in terms of the various 
States and Territories. Since the Commonwealth (with its unity of policy) 
was constituted, the various State railway systems arc gradually being 
linked across the boundaries. For instance, note the delay in linking the 

• This aspect of AuMtralian physiography is treated in a masterly fashion by Professor David in liis 
presidential address to the Royal Society of New South Wales, liUl. This should certainly be 
consulted. 

C. 12154. G 



88 



Federal Handbook. 



Riverina to Melbourae. These have been hitherto perhaps the chief 
economic factors in maintaining State differences within the artificial 
boundaries determined by the Constitution. 

Although Australia is a continent characterized by the slow change in 
the nature of its surface, by monotony in the flora and by vast uniform 
expanses of rolling grass land or more arid steppe, yet the larger States are 
so extensive that several types of environment occur therein and react 
each in its own way on the life and industries of the inhabitants. 

The regions adopted in this account are the following : — 

A. Eastern Cordillera fringing the Pacific and extending from Cape 

York to the Victorian Grampians and Tasmania. 

B. The Murray-Darling Basin, a region chiefly below 1,000 feet, and 

extending from Bourke to the mouth of the Murray. 




Murray Dsr/mg Basin 

South Aust Hiqhlands\, 
<3ni/ Fautt y^neys f | 

Great /Irtesian Basin I 

Great P/aleau fleqion. 



.TASMANIA 



Fio. 1. — The Relation between the poUtical and natural divisions in Australia. 

C. The South Australian Highlands with their associated fault 

valleys, extending from Broken Hill to Port Lincoln. 

D. The Great Artesian Basin reaching from the Gulf of Carpentaria 

to Lake Eyre. 

E. The Great Plateau Region embracing the western half of the 

continent. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 



89 



The political areas are built up as follows : — 



Queensland. . 

(670,500 sq. miles) 

New South Wales, in- 
cluding Federal Capi- 
tal Territory 
(310,372 sq. miles) 

Victoria 
(87,884 sq. miles) 

Tasmania . . 

(26,215 sq. miles) 

South Australia 
(380,070 sq. miles) 



Western Australia 
(975,920 sq. miles) 

Xorthern Territory . 
(523,620 sq. miles) 

Papua 
(90.540 sq. miles) 



Natural Elements. 



Lo^vlands. 

Eastern section of Artesian 
Basin (D) 

South-east portion of Artesian 
Basin (D) ; merging into 
the Murrav-Darling Basin 
(B) 

Southern portion of Murray- 
Darling Basin (B) 



Trough-faults to west of high- 
lands (C). Western portion 
of Artesian Basin (D) 



The Gulf country (E) 



Highlands. 

Northern section of Cordillera 

(A) 
Central section of Cordillera 

(A) 



Southern section of Cordillera 
(A) 

Isolated portion of Cordillera 
(A) 

Highlands of Flinders Range, 
etc. (C). South-eastern por- 
tion of Great Plateau 
Region (E) 

Wholly comprised in the Great 
Plateau Region (E) 

Also provisionally classed with 
the Great Plateau Region 
(E) 

An isolated northern portion of 
the Cordillera (A) 



2. — The Eastern Cordillera. 

Perhaps the dominant feature on most maps of Australia is the so-called 
Great Dividing Range. This belt of higliland undoubtedly constitutes 
the divide between the coastal drainage and that flowing westward to Lake 
Eyre or the Murray Mouth. But if we examine it all closely it is seen to be 
in no sense a range, but is for the most part a series of disconnected elements 
of very diverse origin. 

In Queensland it is only an important feature where formed of basalt- 
flows of comparatively late date. Between these it is often a mere warp- 
ridge but a few hundred feet above the general level. 

In New South Wales in the north the Great Divide gets on solid gi'ound 
for 100 miles, for here it runs along the great New England granite massif. 
But the Liverpool Ranges — quite a late geological formation — deviate it 
to the west. Here the Divide deteriorates to a mere water parting (at 
Cassilis) between the Goulburn and Talbragar Rivers, where the cutting 
action of the Goulburn has driven the Divide far to the west. The " range " 
is not 2,000 feet high hereabouts. 

The Divide returns along the southern rim of the Goulburn Valley towards 
the coast, and then is carried southwards by a series of indefinite ranges, 
consisting here of basalt flows — there of recent folds ; and again, as at Cooma, 
with no apparent elevation at all. Hereabouts we notice that Lake George 
is perched right on the Divide ; while Merigan Creek flows right through 
the so-called Divide ! Near Cooma it enters on an extraordinary zig-zag 
path, which points to recent interruptions in the drainage. These zig-zags 
around the heads of the Snowy and Tambo Rivers are the results of important 
river captures. Finally, in Victoria, the great area of Pliocene basalt in 



90 



Federal Handbook. 



the west of the State has certainly flooded pre-existing lowlands and valleys 
and converted portions of them into the modern Divide. 

Lying parallel to the modern Divide, and in the north considerably to 
the east of it, is another belt of highlands almost coincident with the coastline. 
These coast ranges are formed of an almost continuous series of granite masses 




Fig. 2. — The Granite Areas of Eastern 
Australia, showing the agreement with 
the ancient pre-uplift divide. The 
probable arrangement of early Tertiary 
drainage is indicated. 



Fig. 3. — The later Volcanics of Aus- 
tralia, chiefly late Tertiary basalts, 
showing their association with the 
present divide. 



which reach from Tasmania to Cape York. South of Queensland the modern 
basalt-capped Divide and the granitic masses are mingled to a greater degree. 
This broad " complex " of highlands of varying origin forms a fairly well- 
marked belt to which the name Eastern Cordillera is here applied. 

The following subdivisions of the Eastern Cordillera are convenient :— 

A. The Queensland Highlands. 

B. The South-eastern Highlands, in New South AVales. 

C. The Victorian Cordillera and its Coast Plains. 

D. Tasmania. 

(a) The Queensland Highlands. 
General Physiography. — ^This is a belt of country about 150 miles \vide, 
extending from Cape York to the New South Wales border. It possesses 
a fairly homogeneous structure. In the east, along the coast, extends a 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 



91 



belt of ancient granite ranges often pierced by deep gorges whence the 
coastal streams now reach the sea. Within this bulwark is a belt of later 
Palaeozoic rocks (Devonian to Permian) which have been cut into by coastal 
rivers. Overlying these deposits on the west are later sediments of Meso- 
zoic age. They have been subjected to gentle warping accompanied by 
volcanic outbursts in Tertiary times. 

For some 1,200 miles the coast is flanked by the coral reefs of the Great 
Barrier. Its steep outer margin is some 30 to 75 miles from the coast. 
Within this wall (where each small living reef represents a battlement) is 






A- 






Bascilt 




' ," 6r^nite ' 




'<^,|j; Sunken Coast ^ 



2/00 
fisthomi 



[t- SOO Af/Ves - 



Fig. 4. — ^Section across North Queensland (after Prof. David). 



an inland sea averaging about 20 fathoms in depth. In these clear tropical 
waters are found the pearl-shell, turtle, and beche-de-mer, whose collection 
constitutes industries which centre at Cooktown and Thursday Island. 

Settlement has not radiated from the capital of the State to such an 
extent in Queensland as elsewhere in Australia. Mining led to the growth 
of coast towns such as Cooktown, C;iirns, Townsville, and others in the far 
north. Short railways were pushed inland to reach the mines. The isolated 
sheep and cattle stations also made use of the railways, and the pastoral 
holdings soon increased in number and value. 

Towns and Industries. — -There are four important railways crossing the 
Cordillera in Queensland. The most northern line from Cooktown leads 
inland to the mining fields near Laura. At Cairns the Barron River is cutting 
back a 600-feet gorge (into the edge of the fault scarp) which heads in 
the famous Barron Falls. Up this gorge winds the railway to the Chillagoe 
mines. The country has been found suitable for dairying, and now the 
railway is prolonged a hundred miles south-west to Charleston, so that it 
reaches the lower country west of the highlands. 

Inland from Townsville runs one of the chief Queensland railways. This 
makes no use of the main river valley, that of the Burdokin, for the latter 
traverses the coast range through an impassable gorge. The railway originally 
extended only to Charters Towers near the Upper Burdekin, but now 
reaches far inland almost to South Australia, and will perhaps link uj) witli 
the projected transnontinent il line to Port Darwin. Near Booronaan it 
crosses the Main Divide, which is here barely noticeable thougii to 1 lie north 
basalt ranges form a striking feature. 



92 Federal Handbook. 



Further south along the coast is the port of Mackay, one of the most 
important sugar centres in Australia. It is connected by excellent steamer 
service to the other ports, but no railway yet links it to the capital. Wedged 
in by the granite range to the west, it has a network of local railways bringing 
cane to the central mills. 

Of far greater importance, however, is the area included in the basin of 
the Fitzrov Eiver, which exhibits the same features of ancient stream 
capture from the western system as does the Burdekin. 

Far inland along the Tropic of Capricorn runs the railway from Rock- 
hampton. It crosses the low divide at Jericho, and at present ends at 
Longreach. A rich pastoral and mining region is served by this line. To 
the south-west of Rockhampton lies Mount Morgan (25 miles), one of the 
best-known gold and copper mines ; and Dawson, destined perhaps to be one 
of the chief coal-fields of the southern hemisphere, is also in the Fitzroy 
valley. 

The same general features as those described for the northern part of 
Queensland characterise its southern portion. Sugar ports, such as Bunda- 
berg and Maryborough, also serve as outlets to mining districts such as 
Gympie and Kilkivan. A very flourishing area of basalt country known as 
the Darling Downs is devoted chiefly to agriculture. The railway from its 
chief town (Toowoomba) descends the scarp of the Downs and reaches the 
coal basin of Ipswich ; thence proceeding down the valley of the Brisbane 
River it reaches the capital of the State. 

Although a coast railway is projected from Brisbane for 960 miles north 
to Cairns, yet at present only the section from Brisbane to Rockhampton 
is completed. This delay in linking to the capital is directly due to the 
presence of the granite ranges. Though now forming the coastline and 
preventing easy communication, these were in Tertiary times flanked on the 
east by a broad area of piedmont, which has now sunk beneath the Pacific. 
With this subsidence is correlated the growth of the coral reefs of the Great 
Barrier. 

(b) The South=eastern Highlands in New South Wales. 

General Physiography. — The structure of the highland region of the 
Mother State diSers somewhat from that of Queensland, and considerably 
more is known of its physiography, which may be summarized as 
follows : — ■ 

There are tliree massifs of Palaeozoic rocks buttressed by granite bosses. 
In the north is the New England tableland (3,000 feet to 5,000 feet), extending 
from Queensland to the Liverpool Ranges. Then there is a well-marked 
broad gap where the divide sinks to 2,000 feet from heights of 4,000 feet 
north and south. To this gap — due to the erosion of the tributaries of the 
Hunter in the soft coal measures — the name of the Himter (or Cassilis) geocol 
has been given.* 

In the centre of the highland belt is another plateau of about 3,000-4,000 
feet elevation extending from the volcanics of the Canobolas (near Orange) 
to the great Blue Mountain scarp behind Sydney. It is bounded on the south 
by another broad gap — the Lake George geocol. 

• Geocol is a word coined to express a col or gap on so large a scale that it influences rainfall, 
vegetation, and communications. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 



93 



In the south is a pair of massifs exceeding 7,000 feet in the south-west 
separated from each other by the long narrow valley of the middle 
Murrumbidgee. 

But the most striking feature is the presence of the great coal-measure 
basin or geosyncline which centres at Sydney and extends north for 200 miles 
to the Liverpool Eanges, and south for 100 miles to Moruya. Two great 
beds of payable coal (the Newcastle and Greta seams) extend under a large 
portion of this area, like two black saucers whose eastern rim has been 
truncated by the faulted sea coast. 



/./tCora./ unefer IOOOF!-. . . 

/ooof^f to zooon 

ZOOOF!^ to 3000F! 

oyer 3000 Ft ._ 




Fig. 5. — Map of the main orographical features in South- Eastern Australia, showing tno 
five gcocols or breaks in the Cordillera at (1) Cassilia, (2) Lake George, (3) Cooma, 
(4) Omeo, and (5) Kilmore. The white western area is less than 1,000 ft. in elevation. 

The effect of this geosyncline on the topography is not, however, so 
marked as . might have been expected. Not only the coal-measures (of 



94 



Federal Handbook. 



Permo-Carboniferous age), but also earlier and later deposits have participated 
in the far-reacliing coastal movements of Tertiary times. On the 
whole, we may describe the Cordillera region here as having a gentle slope 




Sooo'^e/oir Sai Lefe/ 



Fig. 6. — Section across the south of New South Wales (after David) showing 
the horst of Kosciusko and the block-faulted peneplain. 

to the west and an abrupt edge on the east, some 2,000 feet high, which'''has 
been truncated by coastal subsidences. These, however, occurred so long 
ago that coastal erosion has gnawed away the sharp faulted edges. 






.0^ 



>^ 



/■' .# 



^^ 



/ 



>tr 




ji^- rriassic RocMs. 
Coal Messures 



Fig. 7.- — Section from the Barrier Range to Sydney (after David) showing the 
Mt. Brown and Cobar peneplains separated by the alluvials of the Darhng River, and 
the warped peneplain of the Main Divide with the coal basin lying to the east of it. 

Moreover, where the rocks are softer— as in the basins of the Clarence and 
Hunter Rivers, and in the soft marine shales of Illawarra — a comparatively 
wide coastal plain has resulted from the ordinary processes of erosion. 

Towns and Industries. — In the north-east the coastal plain, watered by 
the Clarence, Richmond, and Tweed, differs somewhat from the remainder 
of New South Wales. It is characterized by a " soft-wood brush," a relic 
of a Malay flora preserved here by suitable temperature and rainfall. Here 
also is grown all the sugar of the Mother State, for it has been found too cold 
for the canes south of the Clarence Basin. Grafton, Lismore, and Mur- 
willurabah are devoted to sugar growing and dairying, and are linked together 
by an isolated railway system of their own. 

The New England plateau is a resistant mass of Palaeozoic rocks (uplifted 
in late Tertiary times) whose eastern boundary appears to be determined 
largely by a series of grand fault-planes. The streams flowing to the sea 
cascade several thousand feet into deep narrow gorges, of which those at 
the head of the Macleay will undoubtedly be renowned beauty-spots 
in the near future. Pastoral industries and mining form the chief occupa- 
tions of the people in New England, and here English fruits thrive well. 
Armidale is the chief town, while Tenterfield and Glen Innes lie further to 
the north on the railway which runs along the plateau-like divide. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 



95 



The Hunter geocol, drained by the Goulbiu'n and Hunter Eivers, is marked 
by a lower rainfall than any other portion of the State east of the Divide. 
Accompanying this lack of moisture is a prevalence of some of the western 
flora {gidya trees, etc.), which is unknown elsewhere in the littoral province. 
The valley is very fertile in its lower portions, and grows great crops of lucerne 
and maize ; dairying is carried on also, but coal mining is the chief industry 
of the towns around Newcastle, while the upper portion (the Goulburn 
Valley) is occupied by sheep stations. 

The Blue Mountain area is typical of the topography of much of southern 
New South Wales. In place of steep ranges with broad valleys between, 
there are here rather broad undulating plateaux dissected by narrow deep 
gorges and bounded by fault scarps or huge monoclinal folds. The block 
diagram explains the origin of the wonderful Blue Mountain valleys. The 
rivers cut down their beds as the monocline rose in their path ; in the upper 



<%o<r/- Sr,^ o/' Ki//c/ 




Fii;. 8. — -Block diagram showing tho relation between the resistant Triassic sandstone 
(black) and the "bottle-neck" valleys of the Blue Mountains. The effect of the 
monocline on the Nepean Valley is also indicated. 

portions the structure of the rocks was weak and as soon as the hard surface- 
layer (black) was cut away, the soft shales below weie readily removed, 
and so a broad valley resulted. At the monocline slope, however, the river 
is still sawing its way through the hard sandstone ; and so these great valleys 
contract to very narrow " bottle-necks," where the rivers emerge on the 
coastal plain. The Nepean Gorge is due to the river keeping its old path 
in spite of the fold which slowly rose across part of its bed. The Blue 
Mountain plateau is some 80 miles in diameter, with an elevation of 2,000- 
4,000 feet. To the north is a barren expanse of Trias sandstone intersected 
by the Capertee River and its tributaries. To the west it is capped by the 
ancient volcanic cones of the Canobolas Mountains. On the south-east it 
is drained by the tributaries of the Hawkesbury River. 

The Physiography of the Sydney District. — Sailing along tlu; coast northward 
to Sydney one sees a long and almost precipitous scarp behind the narrow 
coastal plain of Illawarra. This scarp, which is about 1,000 feet high, is the 
truncated edge of a sandstone plateau and is not a ridge in any sense of the 



96 



Federal Handbook. 



word. North of Bulli the scarp is coincident with the coast, and the in- 
hospitable cliffs immediately south of Sydney are built of this Trias sand- 
stone. Northward the same features are found, until the lower coastline 




^]:^^^^^^hoalhaven River ^^^ fri^s Sandstone [" 

Softer Strata chieFI 
Cos/ Measures 

0/c/ /o/can/c Plugs 




Fig. 9. — The main physiographic features in the vicinity of Sydney. 

beyond Broken Bay is reached. This also is due to a change in the geological 
formation, softer shales or coal-measures outcropping all along the coast 
north of this point. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 97 



The most striking features, however, are the beautiful drowned river 
valleys. Sydney Harbor is the type example, and is renowned all over the 
world. It is especially valuable as a harbor, because no large river drains 
into it; hence there is no silting. Quite probably the Cox River once 
drained into the harbor, but owing to the drastic changes in the drainage 
in late Tertiary times, a river (the Nepean) running at the foot of the mono- 
cline (Fig. 9) has captured all the streams. Before dealing further 
with the monocline let us glance at the rivers near Sydney. 

Notice the manner in which the four rivers south of Sydney flow directly 
away from the coast. These are the Cataract, Cordeaux, Wingeecarribee, 
and Kangaroo Rivers. They rise on the coast and flow due west in ancient 
broad valleys for many miles. This implies a long-continued period of 
normal erosion, and obviously when these valleys were formed there could 
not have been coastal cliffs a thousand feet high immediately at their origin 
as at present. We are led to believe therefore that not far back in geological 
time there was an extensive area to the east of this divide — perhaps 100 or 
200 miles wide— which has lately subsided beneath the waves. 

There is not a single main river in the Sydney region which behaves 
normally, i.e., flows down the chief line of slope directly to the sea. The 
Upper Colo (or Capertee) is built up largely of streams which are directed 
upstream to the west. Some tributaries of the Cox River show the same 
feature. 

In addition to this huge subsidence there is an even more striking feature 
in the shape of the Blue Mountain monocline (Fig. 8) up which the western 
railway climbs between Penrith and Katoomba. This is a simple fold in 
the crust whereby the western region has been raised 2,000 or 3,000 feet 
above the area lying to the east of the fold. It can be traced 60 or 70 
miles in a north and south direction. It has dammed rivers at Picton and 
Mountain Lagoon. At Mulgoa, Mittagong and other places it has given rise 
to rivers which flow from flat plains into mountain regions in a most 
amazing fashion. We have in fact a system of western drainage upset by 
a buckling of the crust, so that most of it is captured by the subsequent 
north-south Xepean River ; but other portions placidly pursue their old 
courses — cutting into the land as it rose athwart their beds, and still 
heading west in a vain endeavour to reach the vanished central 
Australian sea. 

Towns and Industries.— Avonnd Sydney the coastal plain is about 40 miles 
broad, reaching to the River Nepean below the Blue Mountain monocline 
(Fig. 8). This plain is the centre of an old Triassic lake ; for a great 
portion of it consists of bluish shales (Fig. 9), raised but a hundred feet 
above sea-level. These shales furnish a clay soil much more suitable for 
agriculture than are the barren Trias sandstones underlying and surrounding 
them. The orange and apricot orchards to the west of Sydney occur on this 
type of soil. Northwards the railway to Newcastle passes over barren 
sandstone, of little use for aught but as residential sites, until the more fertile 
coal-measures are reached near Gosford. To the west runs the western 
railway, passing through orchard country until the Nepean River is reached. 
Here the flood-silts grow great crops of maize, lucerne, and pumpkins, etc. 
Then the railway climbs 3,000 feet up the monoclinal fold to the tourist centres 



98 Federal Handbook. 



of Katoomba and Mount Victoria. These are built on the same barren 
sandstone on the fiat uplands between the deep valleys of the dissected 
plateau. Later it crosses the divide beyond the manufacturing town of 
Lithgow, and reaches the pastoral and mining region between Bathurst. 
and Orange. These are situated on much older Silurian slates, which though 
not very fertile, are superior to the Trias soils. Only occasionally on this 
sandstone plateau where Tertiary volcanoes have enriched the soil (as at 
Mount Irvine and Mount Wilson, near Mount Victoria) are there areas 
suitable for close farming. 

The third railway radiating from Sydney runs to the south-west. It 
passes through the manufacturing centres of Clyde and Granville, and 
gradually climbs up the valley of the Nepean until Mittagong is reached. 
From this point it runs at a fairly constant level through poor agi-icultural 
country (except where enriched by basalt flows, as near Moss Vale) until the 
gap south of the Blue Mountain massif is reached near the town of Goulbm-n. 
To the west of the line lies a maze of rugged gorges carved out of the sand- 
stone plateau and containing few settlements except those at Yerranderie. 
where silver is mined, and Wombeyan, where the limestone caves attract 
many visitors. 

Finally, the South Coast railway runs due south over the deep valley 
of Georges River, and having passed the steep coast characteristic of the 
Trias sandstone, it descends to the lUawarra coastal plain which is cut in the 
softer coal measures. Here is a well-watered and fertile dairy country, rich 
also in easily-worked coal mines. Wollongong and Kiama are two important 
towns on small harbors formed by more resistant strata. Some 5 or 10 
miles back from the coast is the 1,000-ft. scarp of the Triassic sandstone 
plateau. 

The western (plateau) portion of the area we are now considering con- 
sists of a land sm-face exhibiting mature to senile features for the most part. 
It is a mining and sheep-raising country, the chief towns being Bathurst, 
Orange, Mudgee, Blayney, Molong, and Crookwell. 

South of this area is the Lake George geocol, where the southern railway 
crosses the divide and commences its descent of the western slopes to the 
Murray River. The Main Divide hereabouts is somewhat indefinite. Some 
cartographers put it west of Lake George, others east of the same (through 
Tarago), while strictly a neighbouring region known as Duck Flat 
constitutes the Great Dividing Range ! A late Tertiary fault with a drop 
of 400 feet on the east has here blocked the head-waters of the Yass River, 
and has given rise to Lake George, the largest freshwater lake in Australia. 

The Yass River joins the main Murrumbidgee River a little above 
Bm-rinjuck. Here the latter river— as a consequence of the Tertiary up- 
lift — is flowing down a 1,500-ft. gorge cut in Palaeozoic slates and granites. 
Advantage of this has been taken to build a gigantic concrete dam 200 feet 
high which will hold the waters back for 40 miles. The water is to be taken 
some 200 miles west down the river bed and used to irrigate the western 
plains near Narrandera. 

The land rises to the south of Lake George into two great massifs 
culminating in Tindery (5,000 feet) and Kosciusko (7,300 feet), and between 
them is the long rift valley of the Murrumbidgee. 



Physical and G-exeral Geography of Australia. 



99 



The northern portion of this valley with the adjacent highlands consti- 
tutes the Federal Capital Territory. This is an area of 900 square miles 
relinquished by New South Wales to the Commonwealth for the purpose 
of building a southern " Washington." The site of the city itself (9 square 
miles) is at Canberra on the Molonglo River, about 36 miles south from 
Yass (on the main southern railway) and 8 miles west from Queanbeyan 
(on the Cooma railway). It is situated on a broad plain, which is overlooked 
by three isolated hills or monadnocks 800 feet high, and is traversed by 
the meandering shallow waters of the Molonglo River. The latter is to be 
dammed to form a lake 4 miles long. 




Soe/n(/dry 
Fig. 10. — The Federal Capital Territory and its relation to the coast. 

To the south-west of the Territory is a great granite liorst,* rising 
at Bimberi Mountain to 6,000 feet, and connected directly with Mount 
Kosciusko. This is traversed by deep north-south valleys, one of which, 
the Cotter Valley, is to contain the water supply of the city. The Territory 
is occupied by about twenty sheep stations together with one or two cattle 



• A horst Is a residual block of the earth's crust which has not participated in the widespread 
depression of the neictiliouring country. 



100 Federal Handbook. 

stations in the rugged southern region. The city site is at an elevation of 
1,900 feet above sea-level, and has an average rainfall of about 20 inches. 
Some 30 miles to the south the rainfall has, however, increased to 50 inches, 
so that a good water supply is assured from the upper Cotter. 

The two mountain masses we have now to consider are undoubtedly 
relics of a uniform topography which has been cut in two by a system 
of rifts and senkungsf elder* (Fig. 5). The main depression thus formed 
is now occupied by the upper Murrumbidgee River and the middle Snowy 
River. There is a low gap near Cooma connecting the two valleys which 
his every appearance of having originally been the outlet of the upper 
Murrumbidgee. The eastern Tindery horst has its flanks washed by the 
Pacific Ocean. There is practically no coastal plain hereabouts, but 
tlourishiug dairying and mining settlements have been established at the 
numerous river mouths. Milton, Ulladulla, Moruya, Eden, and Bega are 
towns of this character. No railways have yet been built, and the coach 
road climbs some 2,000 feet to reach the horst and senkungsfeld country to 
the west. The latter in its southern half is called the Monaro, and is chiefly 
used for cattle-rearing. There are many sheep-stations, however, in the 
fault depressions between the horsts. Some mining is carried on, chiefly 
at Kiandra and Araluen. The Monaro culminates in the summit of Aus- 
tralia — 'Mount Kosciusko (7,340 feet) — ^in the south-west. This is easily 
reached by a good motor road from Cooma, but on the west its slopes descend 
almost precipitously to the waters of the Upper Murray. 

(c) The Victorian Cordillera and its Coast Plains. 

Nowhere is the artificial nature of our State boundaries better shown 
than in the south-eastern corner of the continent. The massif of Kosciusko 
continues uninterruptedly across the border into Victoria, forming a large 
high-level plateau whose summit is second only to Kosciusko (Fig. 5). 
A favourite tourist resort is Mount Bufialo, another flat-topped granite 
horst between tributaries of the Ovens. Westward of the Omeo gap the 
plateaux are more dissected, and indeed become real ridges which dwindle 
to a level of about 1,200 feet at Kilmore Junction. Beyond this, to the 
west, there are more or less isolated mountain elements, such as the Pyrenees. 
a series of granite bosses, and the north-south sandstone ridges of the 
G-rampians. 

A mountain " range " of greater uniformity than the great Divide 
would seem to have once run along the present Victorian coast in the form 
of the uplifted Jurassic sediments of the Wannon Hills, Cape Otway 
Ranges, and South Gippsland Hills. Between these and the main Divide 
lies the G-reat Valley of Victoria. 

Towns and Industries. — The rugged east-central portion of Victoria is 
practically uninhabited. There are a few small mining townships (Omeo, 
Bright, etc.), and one or two tourist resorts such as Buffalo ; but, for the rest, 
it is more profitable to settle in the coastal plains to the south, or in the 
lower valleys of the Murray tributaries to the north. 

The Gippsland Lakes — really lagoons formed by dunes drifting across 
the mouths of the rivers — are favourite resorts of tourists and fishermen. 

* A senkungsfeld is an area depressed below the general level by trough-faulting. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 



101 



Bairnsdale, on the Mitchell River, is an important town and railway terminus ; 
Sale, nearer Melbourne, at the western end of the Lake District, is the chief 
town in Gippsland. Farming, dairying, and pastoral occupations support 
the people, while the foothills (as at Walhalla) have yielded a considerable 
quantity of gold. 




Fig. 11. — The topograiihv nl .\l( lliounie and its environs. 

The high rainfall (4-5 inches) of south-west Gippsland is accountable for 
the growth of the giant eucalypts. These are the largest hardwood trees 
in the world ; some over 320 feet in height have been measured. 

North of the mountains are small townships which in the east are chiefly 
devoted to mining (Bcechworth and Yackandandah). Wangaratta, Benalla, 



102 Federal Handbook. 



and Seymour, on the Inter-State railway, are flourishing towns devoted to 
farming and pastoral industries generally. The rough country to the south 
of Benalla was once the haunt of numerous bushrangers, of whom Kelly 
was perhaps the most notorious. 

When the Kilmore geocol is passed in our traverse to the west, the 
character of the country changes considerably. A network of railways 
crosses without difficulty the so-called Dividing Range, and to the north- 
west sends out the six tentacles which have helped so greatly in developing 
the Wimmera and Mallee plains. Ballarat, Bendigo, Castlemaine, Ararat, 
Stawell all owe their origin to gold mining, and their present prosperity in no 
small degree to the less fluctuating profits of agriculture and sheep-farming. 

Melbourne has grown up around the mouth of the Yarra, and has spread 
southward along the flat tea-tree covered shores of Port Phillip for 1.5 miles 
or so. Williamstown and the large town of Geelong have been settled in 
suitable sheltered spots on the western shores of the Bay. The climate and 
soils of the surrounding districts are eminently suited to farming and fruit 
growing. 

Melbourne is situated in the centre of a saucer-like plain of about 35 miles 
radius (Fig. 11). The rim is fairly complete to the north, but is interrupted by 
broad gaps to the south. The southern part of this plain has been drowned 
by the sea, and constitutes Port Phillip. The most prominent elevations near 
Melbourne are of volcanic origin. Thus Mount Macedon (.3,324 feet) consists 
of dacites and trachytes, and is a conspicuous peak on the Divide; but just 
behind this the Divide separating the Campaspe (which joins the Murray 
River) and Saltwater Rivers is 1,200 feet lower and almost indistinguishable. 

On the north the " notch in the rim " at the Kilmore Gap is only 1,145 
feet high, so that Melbourne is peculiarly well suited to collect the products 
of the Upper Murray basin. The long narrow Hume Range culminating 
in Mount Disappointment bounds it on the north-east. South of this is the 
very interesting valley of the Yarra. Extensive trough-faulting has 
produced the Croydon senkungsfeld ; however, the Yarra has not taken 
advantage of this outlet, but has continued on its old course, cutting a deep 
gorge through the Mitcham-Eltham plateau as the latter rose in its path. 

Another gap, occupied by the Koo-wee-rup Swamp and the tea-tree 
flats behind Crrum, occurs between the Dandenong volcanics (2,060 feet) 
and Arthur's Seat. A similar pair of elevations — Mount Bellarine and the 
You Yangs — -define the circular plain on the south-west. 

Finally, in the west, is the low scarp of the Ballarat Plateau. This 
is very prominent near Bacchus Marsh, where a striking loop on the railway 
is due to this feature. Cutting through this scarp in a picturesque gorge is 
the Werribee River, famous for its sections of Permian glacial beds. 

West of Port Phillip is a basaltic lowland area known as the Western 
District. It is studded with ancient craters, of which that at Tower Hill 
may well have been the last active volcano in Australia. The basaltic 
plains extend from Melbourne to the Glenelg River, a distance of about 150 
miles, and are about 50 miles broad. With its ample rainfall and fertile 
volcanic soil, the Western District is one of the richest pastoral and 
agricultural areas in Australia. Its chief towns are Hamilton, Terang. 
Camperdown, and Colac. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 103 

In this region are several centres of closer settlement, served b}'- the 
ports of Warrnambool and Portland. Railways connect these ports to 
Melbourne, but it is hoped that the capital city (which is twelve times 
larger than any other Victorian town) will be saved from further congestion 
by their greater independence. 

(d) Tasmania. 

Separated from the miinland by the late subsidence of Bass Straits, 
Tasmania forms a unit which has not foundered like much of Tertiary 
Australia. Two important trend lines associated with granite bosses running 
down each side of the island would seem to have buttressed and preserved 
the central sediments. The central plateau consists of coal-measures capped 
largely by basic lavas. These huge mesa-like massifs are known as " Tiers." 
Though they may have been isolated by block faults yet the protection from 
erosion by the hard cap of lava may account for their characteristic structure. 
Cradle Mount (5,069 feet), at the north-west of the plateau, presents 
to the sea a huge scarp, which is probably due to an extensive N.W.-S.E. 
fault plane. Large lakes, drained by rivers which have cut deep gorges in 
the edges of the Tiers, occur on the plateau. 

The south-west is uninhabited. It consists of series of strike ranges 
running north-west and south-east, which have been dissected into deep 
valleys by the Gordon and other rivers. A rainfall of 50-100 inches occurs 
in the west, and a dense scrub of interlocking trees and creepers almost 
wholly prohibits communication at present. However, in the north-west 
the extremely rich mining fields have led to the country being opened up by 
a narrow-gauge railway in spite of great natural obstacles. 

Towns and Industries. — With the exception of the mining region mentioned 
above, almost all settlement is confined to the eastern lowlands between the 
central plateau and the sea. Along the north coast, east of Table Cape, 
is a flourishing agricultural and pastoral region, the chief towns, Burnie, 
Devonport, and Latrobe, lying on the estuaries of the chief rivers. Wheat, 
dairying, and cattle are more important in the north than wool-growing, 
which centres rather in the Derwent and Macquarie Valleys. 

The chief railway connects Hobart (the capital) with Launceston (the 
second town) on the Tamar estuary. It passes through a country whose 
climate has often been compared to that of England, though its latitude is 
rather that of the Riviera. 

The eastern tributaries of the Tam'ir rise in the Ben Lomond massif — 
which reaches 5,000 feet. To the south-east of this highland are the coal 
mines of Fingal, situated on the South Esk River in one of the eastern valleys 
which are noted for their sudden floods. 

The environs of Hobart are devoted to the growth of English fruits, 
especially apples, but wheat and dairying are also important industries. 
New Norfolk, Hamilton, Bothwell, Sorrel, and Oatlands are the chief towns 
in the Derwent basin ; while Launceston, Deloraine, Longford, Westbury, 
and Campbelltown are the chief centres of settlement on the tributaries of 
the Tamar. 

3. — The Lowland Belt of Australia. 

Between the Eastern Cordillera and the Western Tahldand lie the Central 
Lowlands. This area is conveniently divided into the Murray-Darling 
Lowland in the south, and the Artesian Lowlands in the centre and north. 

C.12).i4. n 



104 



P'ederal Handbook. 



In Permian times there was a long and rather narrow depression extending 
from Cooktown (Queensland) to Cape Howe (New South Wales), while the 
central portion of Tasmania was also occupied by the Permian Sea. In these 
seas were deposited sediments conformable with our chief coal-measures. 
Since the coal seams in the latter are of freshwater origin, the sea 
was occasionally shut off from the ocean and presumably restricted in 
area. 

In Triassic times the region further to the west sank, and the main 
axis of submergence seems to have moved west also. Somewhat later, in 
Cretaceous times, a further depression took place, still to the west. The 
deposits now laid down constitute the greater part of the lowlands under 
consideration. There we see the present river systems initiated — for most 




Fig. 12.- 



rriassic. 



Cretaceous 



P/e/ocene. 



vMain drainage basins in post -Palaeozoic periods, showing the gradual 
movement of the trough axes to the west. 



of the inland rivers, e.g., Upper Lachlan, Castlereagh, Macquarie, Condamine, 
and Barcoo, are heading for this ancient sea. An elevation en masse has 
turned the Cretaceous sea into dry land, and also raised the Cordillera higher. 
In later Tertiary times the gulfs which were relics of the Cretaceous sea 
(at Murray mouth and south of Carpentaria) were also elevated, and Australia 
arrived at its present shape. 

In the southern portion the Mesozoic marine sediments (here largelv 
Triassic) have been covered by an extensive deposit of river silts and 
estuarine gravels. In the far south occur the upraised Tertiary marine 
beds which were deposited in the Murray gulf at a time when the tributaries 
of the Murray River entered the sea by separate mouths. 

4, — The Murray=Darling Lowlands. 

The southern portion constitutes the Murray-Darhng Lowlands. 

This is an approximately square area of some 400 miles wide, which lies 
chiefly in New South AVales. The boundaries are fairly well defined on the 
south by the portion of the cordillera forming the Victorian highlands. 
On the west it is flanked by the inliers of very ancient slates and 
quartzites (of Cambrian age or earlier) which constitute the Flinders 
and Barrier Ranges. On the east it rises gradually to the three tablelands 
already considered. The foothills (below 2,000 feet) may be classed as 
lowlands. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 



105 



On the north the boundary between this division and the Great Artesian 
Basin is not apparent from surface features. It has been mapped from 
borings, and runs along the rivers Bogan and Darling to Bourke, and thence 
in a general westerly direction until the Cambrian highlands are met with 
beyond White Cliffs. 

(a) Cobar=Wagga Peneplain. 

It is impossible to define sharply the boundary to the east. If we accept 
the 2,000-ft. contour as a natural limit of the dry lowlands (which view is 
supported to some extent by the isohyetals and by the distribution of the 
plains vegetation), then considerable areas of folded Palaeozoic rocks are 
included in these lowlands. They may be grouped in one division, which has 

Artesian Basin 

.,---. Bourke^ 




Fig. 13. — The Murray-Darling Lowlands and their subdivisions : — 1. Cobar-Wagga 
Peneplain ; 2. Western Plains and the Riverina ; 3. Ancient Murray Estuary. 

been named the Cobar-Wagga Peneplain.* Unlike the Eastern Cordillera 
it has not participated to any great extent in the Tertiary uplift, and so it 
really very closely represents early Tertiary Australia. It is rich in minerals, 
especially gold and copper, and elsewhere has been named the " Gold-Copper 
Slope " for this reason. 

Towns and Industries. — The area is of an hour-glass pattern, the valley 
of the Lachlan almost separating the two inliers of ancient mineralized rock 

* a peneplain is an old land surface planed down by rivers and other erosive action nearly to sea 
level. It may afterwaids be elevated, but retains the same features, of course. 

H 2 



106 Federal Handbook. 



In the Cobar moiety mining and sheep-grazing are universal, the chief towns 
on this " Palaeozoic island " being Cobar, Nymagee, Nyngan, and Narromine. 
In the southern and eastern portion of this peneplain the rainfall is greater 
(15-25 inches), and an important portion of the wheat belt is included within 
its area. Wagga, Young, and Albury, and, in the north, Parkes and Forbes, 
are wheat centres, and with dry farming and suitable wheat the belt is spread- 
ing to the west. Wyalong, Forbes, Parkes, Adelong, and Young are centres 
of gold and copper fields, and since sheep also graze here in large numbers 
it is seen that these southern foothills in New South Wales are usually rich 
in pastoral, mining, and agricultural resources. 

(b) The Western Plains and the Riverina. 

These plains lie along the course of the Darling (south of Bourke), and 
penetrate considerable distances into the Cobar-Wagga Peneplain. Their 
greatest breadth (200 miles) is in the Riverina — a name given to the Mesopo- 
tamia of the Lower Lachlan, Mun-umbidgee, and Murray rivers. For several 
hundred miles no hill is met with ; indeed, no rock outcrop breaks the monotony 
of tbe plains. 

The great rivers for the most part flow in rather deep gullies through these 
plains. Ill times of drought, the Darling and Lachlan degenerate to a string 
of waterholes, but the Murrumbidgee rarely ceases to flow and the Murray 
never. During the floods which occasionally occur, the rivers spread for 
miles over the plains and re-occupy ancient channels. Later these are 
left as serpentine " billabongs," and large lakes may originate thus. There 
are said to be 70 of these lakes along the Lower Darling. 

More or less permanent distributaries are also common on the Lower 
Darling and Murrumbidgee, and are locally known as anabranches. 

Towns and Industries. — The plains country is devoted to the merino 
sheep. The rainfall is too low for wheat, except in the eastern Riverina, 
where the precipitation rises to 20 inches. Large holdings of land are 
necessary in the western plains, and single stations may have as many as 
100,000 sheep. In the west there are only one or two towns of any import- 
ance, which distribute stores to the sheep stations and r -ceive wool for 
transport via rail or steamer to Melbourne or Sydney. Among those further 
east may be mentioned Deniliquin, Hay, Moulamein, Condobolin, Jerilderie, 
and Narrandera. 

An area of great economic interest is located on the Lower Murrumbidgee 
near Narrandera. Two hundred miles up the river is the Burrinjuck Dam, 
below the junction of the main stream with the Yass and Goodradigbee 
rivers. The retaining wall is to be 240 feet high, and will dam back the 
water for 40 miles up the main stream, with important additions in the Yass 
and Goodradigbee valleys. From the dam the conserved water flows at first 
via the river channel, and later by an artificial cut to the Yanco irrigation 
area. It is expected that about 200,000 acres of first class land and 360,000 
acres of second class land near Yanco can be subdivided for intense culture. 

The special feature of this region is, however, the important river system 
consisting of the River Murray and its tributaries. With its main tributary, 
the Darling, no less than 2,000 miles are navigable in favorable seasons, but 
internal navigation is decreasing in importance as the railways are extended 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 107 

With a high river the Murray is navigable practically to Albury, but there is. 
very little traffic beyond Echuca (which is 666 miles from the South Australian 
Border). On the Darling steamers trade as far as Walgett, a distance of 
1,180 miles from Wentworth. The Murray is navigable for about seven 
months (July to January inclusive) in the year ; the Darling may be blocked, 
for several years in a dry series of seasons. 

(c) The Ancient Murray Estuary. 

An approximately circular area in the south of the Australian Lowlands 
occupies an old bay or estuary into which the Darling, Murrumbidgee, and 
Murray probably entered by separate mouths. It extends from Menindie, 
on the Darling, to Glenelg River (western Victoria), and is about 300 miles 
broad, its limits being Swan Hill (on the Murray) to the east, and the Mount 
Lofty Ranges (South Australia) to the west. In this region the rocks consist 
of marine sediments of late Tertiary age, which not long ago formed the floor 
of portion of the Southern Ocean. The rainfall is rather low (10-20 inches), 
the country being sheltered by hills from rain-bearing winds ; but large areas 
which were formerly deemed worthless are progressing rapidly since it has 
been discovered that wheat can be profitably grown here. The natural 
vegetation, especially in the southern portion, consists of a low shrub-like 
eucalypt called the " mallee," which forms very thick copse-like masses. 
This is being cleared to make way for the wheat. The Lower Murray passes 
through the middle of this tract, in which it receives no tributaries except in 
time of flood. 

In the south-east the rainfall increases, and the Wimmera District 
is supplied by the head waters of several streams which rarely reach the 
Murray. Here there are extensive irrigation and water supply works as at 
Glenorchy, Dooen, and Boort. Some of these enable large crops to be grown, 
others supply water for stock in the drier periods of tlie year. 

The irrigation centres of Renmark and Mildura on the Murray (near the 
Darling confluence) are of great interest. Here large fruit crops are obtained 
in a region with only a 10-in. rainfall, by water pumped from the Murray. 
The drainage of the whole Murray basin enters the sea by an insignificant 
outlet so shallow that none but the smallest steamers can cross its bar. 

The portion of this elevated Tertiary estuary which has been settled most 
successfully lies in the south-eastern corner of South Australia. With a 
good rainfall of 30 inches this corner of the State is noted for its crops and 
fruit, and it enjoys the most favorable climate of any part of the State of 
South Australia. This is largely due to the fact that it extends sufficiently 
far south to be influenced by the dominant rain-bearing westerly winds for 
a large part of the year. 

There is here, however, a sub-artesian water supply which is really dele- 
terious. A large area between the Mount Gambler Railway and the coast 
was originally a sour swamp land, being flooded by the outflow from the 
more elevated porous beds to the north and east. The crater lakes of Mount 
Gambler owe their water supply to this artesian flow. A very large drainage 
scheme now in progress his already cost £311,000 and will co.st as much 
again. This will improve 2,000,000 acres of agricultural land. 



108 



Federal Handbook. 



5. — The Great Artesian Basin. 

This region constitutes the northern portion of the Central Lowland belt 
of Australia. It includes about 576,000 square miles, comprising more than 
half of Queensland and important slices of territory in New South Wales 
and South Australia. 

During Mesozoic times a large gulf extended from the Gulf of Carpentaria 
to Lake Eyre. This covered much the same ground as the Artesian Basin, 
to which, indeed, it gave rise. In this basin were deposited thick beds of 







Cu/f or C^rpentSLr/^ 







D/a^ramma.C/c Section a./on^ line A. £. 
Fig. 14. — The Great Artesian Basin. 



sand, which ultimately became a permeable sandstone, and over these were 
laid down strata of an impermeable nature (blue clays, shales, etc.). Later, 
earth movements elevated this area, and the underlying peripheral porous 
sandstones were exposed by erosion. 

Rain falling on the upturned porous beds (which are perhaps Triassic 
in New South Wales, and Cretaceous in Queensland) is rapidly absorbed, 
and flows underground towards the lower portion of the basin, which probably 
occurs in the north. There is probably an outlet for this underground flow 



Physical asd General Geography of Australia. 109 

into the Gulf of Carpentaria. Many mound springs to the west of Lake 
Eyre — along the railway line — also represent a natural outlet to this basin. 
In New South Wales there are nearly a hundred Government bores and 
about 250 private bores. At Dolgelly (near Moree) a bore was sunk 4,806 
feet and gave 682,000 gallons per day. In Queensland there are about 
600 flowing bores and 168 sub-artesian where the water does not reach the 
surface without pumping. 

The Artesian Region may be divided into two parts, which may be 
termed the Lake E}Te Division (in the west) and the Eastern Division 
(which comprises western Queensland). The dividing line is somewhat 
arbitrary, but is not far from the 10-iu. isohyet. Thus the western is 
practically desert country, and the eastern is a very important mining and 
pastoral region. 

(a) The Eastern or Pastoral Artesian Region. 

This belt lies to the west of the cordillera and gradually changes from the 
uplands of the Great Divide, through rolling downs to the monotonous levels 
of the region around Lake Eyre. It extends about 1,200 miles from the Gulf 
of Carpentaria to Dubbo, on the Macquarie River (New South Wales), and 
is about 300 miles wide. 

The northern portion around the gulf consists of a low-lying country — 
probably the elevated bed of the gulf adjacent — with a rainfall of 20 to 30 
inches. It is watered by numerous rivers. Normanton, the chief town, 
is partly supplied with water by an artesian bore. Behind the mangrove 
swamps of the northern margin is an important cattle-grazing district. The 
chief industries are, however, connected with mining, much gold beinw 
obtained at Croydon and copper at Cloncurry. These ore-deposits occur 
in " islands " of older rock, projecting through the artesian water-bearing 
strata. 

To the south of the gulf country the land rises considerably, and a strip 
about a thousand feet above the sea extends south to the headwaters of 
the Paroo and other northern tributaries of the Murray, whence it gradually 
slopes down to 500 feet along the southern boundary of the Artesian 
Basin. 

It is important to note that this portion of the Artesian Basin lies almost 
wholly in the 10 to 20 in. rainfall area, so that except in the extreme south, 
where some wheat is grown, there is nothing to compete with the pastoral 
industry. Hughenden, Winton, Barcaldine, Charleville, and Cunnamulla 
are all centres of sheep and cattle districts, connected by railways to one of 
the ports, Townsville, Rockhampton, or Brisbane. 

(b) The Lake Eyre Basin or Desert Artesian Region. 

The remaining division of the Artesian Basin comprises the lowlands 
drained by the rivers Diamintina, Barcoo, etc. The lowest portion of 
the area constitutes Lake Eyre. The southern arm of this lake usually 
contains salt water, while the remainder is a vast salty plain formed from 
alluvium carried down by the large rivers which now enter it onlv in 
flood time. It is situated within the 10-in. isohyet, yet many pastoral 
areas have been occupied, especially along the beds of the Diamantina and 
Barcoo. 



ilO Federal Handbook. 



6. — ^The South Australian Highlands and the Associated Trough 

Faults. 

This isolated region of elevation extends from Cape Jervis in a north-south 
line to Hergott Springs, near Lake Eyre. It consists of " numerous local 
ranges which in places reach an elevation of over 3,000 feet. The ranges 
are usually separated from each other by undulating or nearly level plains ; 
and as a result of these longitudinal valleys the northern railway has been 
carried through the hill country, reaching an elevation near Petersburg of 
over 2,000 feet, without the necessity of cutting a single tunnel."* 

The present topography of the highlands is determined chiefly by a series 
of faults on the western side of the Cambrian highlands. These faults 
run meridionally and appear to have taken place in almost every geological 
epoch. Running parallel to the highlands is a subsidence area which Pro- 
fessor Gregory has termed the " Rift Valley of Australia," which constitutes 
St. Vincent's Gulf and Spencer's Gulf — York Peninsula being a horst between 
two subsidences. The Rift Valley extends north through Lake Torrens, 
and has probably contributed to the origin of Lake Eyre. The scarp faces 
an the west of the Mount Lofty Ranges are not yet in equilibrium, and slips 
on a large scale along the old fault lines make this corner of Australia perhaps 
the most active seismological region in the continent. (See Chapter VIL, 
" Geology of the Commonwealth," Fig. 1.) 

To the east the ancient Cambrian and Pre-Cambrian rocks diminish in 
height and gradually merge in a low level peneplain of old rock which is 
bounded, and in part covered, by the Tertiary sediments of the Murray- 
Darling lowlands. In these ancient altered and folded rocks occur the chief 
mineral deposits of South Australia. Among these are the famous Wallaroo 
and Moonta copper mines, at the head of St. Vincent's Gulf; Burra and 
Kapunda, once equally important, have not been worked for many years, 
but just over the border in New South Wales is situated Broken Hill, the 
largest known ore deposits in Australia. The traffic of Broken Hill passes 
almost wholly through South Australia, either to Port Pirie, on Spencer's 
Gulf, or to tiie capital, Adelaide. The population is over 30,000, and since 
1882, when the lode was discovered, silver-lead-zinc ore to the value of 
£60,000,000 has been won. 

The main divide of these highlands lies somewhat to the west, culminating 
in Mount Lofty (near Adelaide, 2,334 feet). Mount Razorback (near Burra, 
2,834 feet), and Mount Brown (near Quorn, 3,100 feet). None of the 
rivers are of importance, and in the north the water supply is obtained 
chiefly from wells smik in the beds of the intermittent rivers. The lakes 
are all shallow sheets of salt water, and are worthless from an industrial 
point of view. 

The Cambrian Highlands (including the Mount Lofty and Flinders Ranges) 
lie in the course of strong westerly winds in winter. They have at that season 
a rainfall which is found to be eminently suited to the needs of the 
wheat plant ; in fact, many districts with only 10 inches per year can grow 
an excellent hard wheat, because practically the whole of the precipitation 
takes place from April to October (inclusive). 

• The Geography of South Australia, hicluding the Northern Territory, by Walter Howchin and J. W. 

Gregory (1909), p 82. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. Ill 

The main settlement in South Australia is therefore confined to a 
triangle included between Streaky Bay (west), Beltana (north), and Morgan 
(south-west). Mount Gambler and the Pinnaroo wheat area have already 
been described as likely to become areas of close settlement. 

The heaviest rainfall occurs near Adelaide, on the slopes of the Mount 
Lofty Ranges. On the lower slopes, where there is less moisture, are 
planted the vineyards whose wines are becoming favorably known all over 
the world. Clare and Tanunda are two of the most famous cellars, both 
being to the north-east of Adelaide. 

It is to wheat, however, that South Australia chiefly owes her prosperity. 
The wheat line coincides, for reasons stated, with the 10-in. (winter) isohyet. 
The three peninsulas, E\Te's, Yorke's, and Mounty Lofty, are included in 
this area which is one of the most important wheat producing districts in the 
Commonwealth. 

Wool is grown throughout the State wherever the annual rainfall 
exceeds 9 or 10 inches, including all the Cambrian highlands. But a large 
area in the north-west, beyond a line joining Eucla to Oodnadatta, is still 
No Man's Land. However, just as pastoral industries have paid their way 
m the dry regions of Hergott and Oodnadatta, where railway transport is 
available in time of need, so we may hope that the new transcontinental 
railway from Port Augusta to Kalgoorlie will lead to the settlement of the 
region in question. 

7. — The Great Plateau Region. 

To the west of the Australian Lowlands, i.e., beyond a line joining the 
two gulf regions (Spencer and Carpentaria), lies a vast extent of country 
forming the chief geographic unit in Australia and embracing two-thirds of 
the continent; it consists of an ancient peneplain composed chiefly of 
Palaeozoic or older rocks which have been planed down to a more or less 
uniform level. This now stands 1,000 to 1,500 feet above the sea, and for 
the most part does not seem to have been submerged since middle Palaeozoic 
times. However, fringing this massif all round the west coast, are lowlands 
of Tertiary age ; while there is a fairly continuous hinterland of Mesozoic 
and late Palaeozoic rocks which resemble the larger belt on the east of the 
continent. This obviously indicates that the margins of the West Australian 
massif have oscillated above and below sea-level many times in post- 
Cambrian times. 

Only in the south, at the head of the Bight, is there any large area of 
late rocks ; but here there appears to be a Cretaceous basin extending for a 
radius of 300 miles all round Eucla. 

In this region is comprised the whole of Western Australia and most of 
the Northern Territory and South Australia, except those portions of the 
latter which have already been described under the heads of the Lake Eyre 
Basin and the South Australian highlands. It is by no means so important 
economically as the Central Lowlands, and supports only about 6 per 
cent, of the Australian population (250,000 out of 4,000,000). 

It will be recognised that there are no dominating physical features to 
assist subdivision of this large area, except it l)e the Central Highlands in the 
east — which form one subdivision. 



112 



Federal Handbook. 



Since this tableland extends through almost 25 degrees of latitude, it is 
obvious that it is subjected to very different meteorological conditions. 
Accordingly the most satisfactory primary divisions are — ^the Southern 
Temperate Region, the Northern Tropical Region, and the Central Desert 
with its enclave, the Central Highlands. 

(a) The Northern Tropical Region. 

The Tropical Region consists of a broad coastal strip from Sharks 
Bay to the Gulf of Carpentaria. In this region the rainfall occurs in summer, 
and increases in amount as the equator is approached. It is bounded on the 




Fig. 15. — Map showing the three divisions of the Westralian Plateau, 
and the 10-inch isohyet. 

south and east by the Desert Region. Unfortunately there are no rain 
stations between Nullagine and Barrow Creek, so that the division line 
(approximately the 10-in. isohyet) is only tentative. 
It may be described under the heads : — 

(1) Northern Territory Lowlands ; 

(2) Northern Territory Highlands ; 

(3) The North-west Coast, comprising the regions around Kimberley, 

Pilbarra, Sharks Bay, and the Murchison. 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 113 

(i.) The Northern Territory Lowlands. 

The Northern Territory consists of two rather different provinces. The 
coastal portion is low-lying, rising only to 300 feet at 100 miles from the 
coast along the railway. This low country is still practically unknown except 
along the railway. It does not appear to be very good cattle country, and 
though the rainfall is very heavy in summer the soil is poor in plant food 
and the vegetation, on the whole, is scanty, except along the rivers. The 
hinterland, including Arnhem Land to the east, appears to be a dissected 
peneplain about 1,000 feet above sea-level. 

The rivers and creeks of the Northern Territory are in many cases dry 
gullies during the dry season ; but they become considerable streams in the 
wet season, from December to March. There are notable exceptions to this. 
For instance, the Edith, Catherine, and Roper are large rivers, all of which 
flow at a constant rate all through the dry weather. The most important is 
the Roper, which rises near Bitter Springs — to which place it is proposed to 
transfer the capital — and flows perennially thence. It is a noble stream 100 
yards wide and occasionally 25 feet deep, though crossed by quartzite bars. 
Some of the reaches on the river are said to be 40 miles long. 

The capital is at Darwin, a small township consisting chiefly of 
Government buildings. From the capital a narrow-gauge railway runs to 
Pine Creek, 145 miles inland, and will shortly be extended to the Katherine. 
A British line of steamers maintains a monthly service, and there is a small 
local trade, a steam-ship running between Port Darwin, Port McArthur, 
Daly River, Victoria River, and Wyndham (Western Australia). 

The population of the Territory in 1911 comprised about 1,700 whites, 
1,300 Chinamen, and some 20,000 aboriginals. The following were the chief 
products in 1910 :— pearl-shell, £10,000 ; tin, £34,308 ; and gold, £21,632. 

(ii.) Northern Territory Uplands. 

These extend southward from the Roper River, and include the most 
promising portion of the Territory. Though the rainfall is less, gradually 
decreasing from 40 inches to 6 inches, yet the climate is more healthy, and the 
strip of country southward to Tennant's Creek is well adapted to carry cattle. 
The railway traverses fair pastoral country as far as Pine Creek, though 
practically unstocked. There are however, many cattle stations on 
the low eastern plateau known as the Barkly Tableland. These are linked 
to the more populous regions by a mail route via Camooweal just witliin the 
Queensland borders. 

(iii.) TifE North-west Region. 

This is wholly included in Western Australia, and consists of a strip of 
country between the desert and the sea about 400 miles wide, extending 
from the Ord River in the north to the Murchison River in the west. The 
rainfall decreases from 30 inches in the north to about 6 inches per year on the 
Murchison. 

The towns in this vast territory of 500,000 square miles number about a 
dozen, being, with very few exceptions, either settlements around stamp 
batteries on a gold-field, or ports leading to them. The country, however, 
•contains numerous sheep and cattle stations. 



114 Federal Handbook. 



The Kimberley region contains a one-time important gold-field, with its 
centre at Hall's Creek on the divide between the Ord and Fitzroy Rivers. 
Numerous cattle stations have been occupied along both these rivers ; but 
the rugged region between them is almost entirely uninhabited by white 
settlers. Wyndham, at the mouth of the Ord River, Derby, on the estuary 
of the Fitzroy, and Broome are the only towns. From the latter, which 
is an important pearling centre and cattle port, starts the cable to Java. 

Pearling extends northwards from Sharks Bay, where the pearl-shell is 
of a smaller and less valuable kind, to Broome — the commercial base of the 
industry. 

The next centre of settlement is the Pilbarra region ; it is noted for 
its pearls, mining, heat, and cyclones. Hereabouts the average rainfall is 
15 inches per annum ; yet there are many records of 20 inches falling in a 
few hours. Cossack and Condon are situated where the tropical tornadoes 
recurve and strike the coast. The hinterland also holds an unenviable record 
for heat. 

The Pilbarra gold-fields, with centres at Marble Bar and Nullagine, and 
the Whim Ci-eek Copper Mines have led to the development of the country. 
A railwav is being built from Port Headland to Nullagine. Large areas can 
be supplied with water for stock by putting down shallow bores. Sheep 
are the principal stock depastured in this region. Many of the stations are 
worked almost entirely by aboriginal labour, so that the wages' bill is 
small. 

The southern portion of this belt, comprising the basins of the Ash- 
burton, Gascoyne, and Mm-chison, should logically be considered with the 
Desert Region, for the greater part of it has a rainfall of less than 10 inches 
per year. However, numerous sheep and cattle stations have been taken 
up, the stock being shipped from Onslow and Carnarvon. 

Far inland from G-eraldton are the gold-fields of Yalgoo, Murchison, and 

Peak Hill. A railway runs through Yalgoo, Mount Magnet, Cue, and Nannine, 

to Meekatharra. 

(b) The Central or Desert Tableland. 

The Desert Region includes most of the areas with a rainfall under 
10 inches. It may be described under the heads : — 

(1) The Desert Proper ; 

(2) The MacDonnell Ranges ; 

(3) The Gold-fields Region. 

(i.) The Desert Proper. 

This division of the Western Tableland is rectangular in shape, about 
1,200 miles from west to east, and 650 from north to south. The Lake 
E%Te Basin (included in the Ai-tesian Lowlands, p. 109) is of the same arid 
character ; and, with this addition, the desert may be described as occupying 
the rectangle between Cossack and Boulia, on the north, and Southern Cross 
and Broken Hill, on the south. In fact, the proposed transcontinental rail- 
ways from Southern Cross to Port Augusta and from Camooweal to Bourke, 
form two of its boundaries. 

This region, with an area of 800,000 square miles, comprises more than 
one-quarter of the whole continent. It therefore merits study, in spite of 



Physical and General Geography op Australia. 115 

the fact that there are probably not a thousand white folk in it, excluding 
the miners in the south-western corner between Kalgoorlie and Laverton. 
Our knowledge is derived from explorers' records, such as those of Giles 
and Carnegie, and from later Government expeditions, such as that of 
Canning in 1906. 

In the north-eastern portion the MacDonnell Ranges have been well 
described by the Horn scientific expedition, and these highlands are now 
sparsely settled ; but the region extending from Oodnadatta to the Westralian 
gold-fields is still desolate. 

Great additions to our knowledge of the w^estern portion of the desert 
have resulted from the recent work of Canning and Talbot. The former 
opened a stock route from Wiluna to the pastoral holdings near Hall's Creek. 
This distance of 700 miles is now supplied with permanent water by 50 
shallow wells. Mr. Talbot has lately made a geological traverse along the 
stock route. He describes the country generally as flat, but diversified by 
low ranges ; the prevailing south-west winds have banked sand ridges 
against the southern slopes of these ranges, but on the lee sides they are often 
flanked by a strip of flat country which in some places grows good feed for 
stock. 

Although at some future time the lower portions of Sturt Creek may 
become settled, Mr. Talbot thinks that the country along the stock route 
^south of that point is never likely to beco;ne occupied by pastoralists. 

The heart of the arid region has been described by Carnegie. In 1896 
he left the Coolgardie gold-field to strike across the continent in a N.N.E. 
direction in the hopes of finding gold-bearing or pastoral country in the 
great desert. Travelling over a long stretch of dry country in which 
the camels were without water for thirteen and a half days, they 
reached a soakage near Alexander Springs. Beyond this a few low sandstone 
ranges and hills were found, and occasionally in the valleys belts of bloodwood 
and a few shrubs edible by camels, but most of the country was a continuous 
waste of sand ridges. They reached Hall's Creek and returned south along 
the South Australian border. He thinks that a stock route from the 
MacDonnell Ranges to the Coolgardie railway is possible in winter. The 
route from the ranges to the south-west is excellent as far as the border; 
from there it would be necessary to hit off the small oases which are met 
with near Mount Squires, Warburton Ranges, Blyth Creek, and Alexander 
Springs. In conclusion, he says of the area traversed on his journey 
(Fig. 15) — " We have demonstrated the uselessness of any persons (either 
pastoralists or miners) wasting their time and money in further investigation 
of that desolate region."* 

(ii.) The MacDonnell Ranges. 
This area of elevated land lies in the middle of the continent, and owing 
to the Horn exploring expeditioii of 1891 we know more about it than about 
many more accessible regions. The Cretaceous area between Lake Eyre and 
the southern ranges of the group consists of stony (" gibber ") plains and of 
arid loamy tracts which support a sparse saltbush flora. Professor Spencer 
calls these the Lower Steppes. 

* D. W. Carnegie, Spinifex and Sand, 1898. 



116 J^'ederal Handbook. 



As soon as the northern boundary of the Cretaceous area is passed (near 
Chamber's Pillar) a striking difierence appears in the configuration of the 
country. 

The rocks consist of sandstones and limestones, which have been folded 
at some ancient period into series of ridges and valleys running east and west. 
These, after being worn down to a level surface, were elevated in quite 
recent geological times, and the rivers have cut out the extraordinary series 
of gorges and lateral valleys which form so striking a feature of the region. 

The northern portion of the MacDonnell area consists of much older rocks, 
such as gneisses and schists, probably allied to those covering a large part of 
Western Australia. Associated with them are certain dykes of granite, 
with white mica (muscovite) , the chief mines being near Mount Brassey, 
in the north-east of the ranges, where plates of mica 6 feet across have been 
obtained. They are sent by camel to Oodnadatta, and are exported for use 
in electrical works. In the same region is Arltunga, a gold-field which 
promised well some years ago, but it is heavily handicapped by its situation 
and surroundings. 

To the west, as soon as the ranges are left behind, the monotonous sand- 
hill, mulga, and spinifex country commences and extends through Western 
Australia to Coolgardie. 

It is to be feared that neither the cattle, mica, nor gold will lead to the 
prosperous settlement of Central Australia. The low rainfall (averaging only 
6 inches per year over a considerable portion of the area) makes extensive 
pastoral occupation impossible, while 200 miles of transport to the railway 
at Oodnadatta — and thence 600 miles to Adelaide — will prevent the working 
of any but very rich mineral fields. 

(iii.) The Gold-fields Region. 

In Western Australia, nearly 400 miles inland from the coast, in a region 
which 2-5 years ago had been crossed only by a few explorers and 
prospectors, and where the rainfall is only 8 inches, is clustered an important 
community of mining men. The chief town, Kalgoorlie, has a population 
of 30,000, and the other large centres (Coolgardie, Kanowna, etc.) have 
a total of about 35,000. Until 1887 it was an uninhabited desert, like 
that already described, but in that year was discovered the Southern Cross 
field and in 1892 the Coolgardie fields. 

At first the only water supply was obtained from small " soaks." Later 
portable condensers were used to separate the salt from water derived from 
holes dug in the salt lakes. Before the railway was opened the Government 
constructed along the route tanks which served as collecting grounds after 
occasional rains. Each of these held about a million gallons, and cost some 
£3,000. This uncertain supply is now superseded by wonderful waterworks 
which bring water from the wetter regions near the coast. Early in 1903 
the present supply-line was completed, connecting a reservoir near 
Perth with Kanowna, 387 miles east of that town. On the Darling Ranges, 
near Perth, there is a rainfall of over 20 inches, and a weir across the Helena 
Rive^r (at Mundaring) impounds 400,000,000 gallons. Nine pumping stations 
elevate the water 1,313 feet to the Coolgardie distributing reservoir. The 
pipe line (33 inches diameter) is laid on the sm'face close to the railway, and 



Physical and General Geography of Australia, 117 

at each of the pumping stations, roughly 40 miles apart, the water is elevated 
about 140 feet, whence it flows by gravity to the next station. 

In 1894 the railway line to Southern Cross was completed and gradually 
extended, as the value of the gold-fields became assured, to Kalgoorlie in 
1897, Menzies, 1899, and since then to Laverton (586 miles), in the north, 
and to Norseman, in the south. 

The transcontinental railway from Kalgoorlie to Port Augusta (1,100 
miles) is now (1913) under construction. The gauge is the standard 
4 ft. 8| in. ; and the other links, Fremantle to Kalgoorlie and Port Augusta 
to Albury, will be altered to suit this gauge. The estimated cost of con- 
struction is £3,988,000. 

This railway will serve an area comprising about 90,000 square miles, 
which can be considered favorable for pastoral development ; but the main 
advantages accruing are due to the increased speed in mails between Europe, 
Western Australia, and Eastern Australia. The military aspect is also one of 
importance. 

In Western Australia this new railway traverses auriferous country for 
65 miles to Cardinia. Thence it passes over granite for 100 miles, and 
further eastward it reaches the " saltbush " country, which is characteristic 
of the Tertiary limestones. 

This region has less than 10 inches rainfall, but in the limestones water 
can be reached by bores several hundred feet deep. Unfortunately, this 
water is usually brackish. 

Within the South Australian border (461 miles) similar limestone country 
is traversed until the ancient rocks around Tarcoola are met with. Here are 
valuable gold deposits, and outlying sheep stations are situated near the 
proposed line at Wilgena and Coondambo. Lake Hart promises to become 
an important source of salt. Near Oakden Hills station it descends from the 
tableland into the Torrens rift, and crosses the head of Spencer's Gulf at 
Yorkey's Crossing, which is only 5 miles from Port Augusta. 

(c) The South=west Temperate Region. 

The South-west Temperate Region is a belt extending from Geraldton 
to Eucla. It lies between the 10-in. isohyet and the sea, and is characterized 
by a winter rainfall increasing to the south-west. This portion of Western 
Australia contains the whole of the agricultural land in the State. It is 
estimated that there are 60,000,000 acres which are suitable for agi-icultural 
purposes. It carries, and will always carry, the bulk of the population of 
Western Australia. 

For descriptive purposes, the South-west Province may be subdivided 
into three belts, which are absolutely controlled by the rainfall. These are — 

(1) The Eastern Pastoral Belt; 

(2) The Central Wheat Belt ; 

(3) The Western Timber Belt. 

(i.) The Eastern Pastoral Belt. 

This belt, extending from Sharks Bay through Southern Cross and Norse- 
man to the Bight, lies approximately between the 8 in. and 13 in. isohyets. 
It is eminently suited for sheep and cattle. Two great rabbit-proof fences- 



118 



Federal Handbook. 



cross this area. One starting from the coast about 50 miles north of 
Geraldton runs east through Yalgoo and then due south to the coast about 
TOO miles east of Albany. The other is further east and extends from 
near Hopetoun north towards Sandstone, and thence to the coast north of 
Pilbarra. These fences are kept efficient by Government maintenance men, 
and they enable the squatter to cope successfully with the rabbit invasion 
from the east. 

(ii.) The Central Wheat Belt. 

This belt lies between the 13 in. and 20 in. isohyets. It extends from 
Ajana to Hopetoun. A strip of country to the east of Hopetoun will be 
found as suitable for wheat as Eyre's Peninsula in South Australia, but is not 
yet developed. 




Fig. 18. — The South- West Province of the Westrahan Plateau. 



In the north are some rich river flats along the Greenough River. Here 
also are the Northampton copper mines. The belt of York gum {Eucalyptus 
roxophleba) and of white gum {E. redunca) is coincident with the wheat 
belt along its whole extent, though the timber is lighter in the north. 

Geraldton and Dongara are the chief settlements in the north. Thence 
the Midland Railway through Mingenew and Giugin traverses the belt to 
Perth ; while further east a new line through Wongan is under construction. 

South of Northam a really tremendous development has gone on of 
late years. The Great Southern Railway to Albany runs along the west of 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 119 



the wheat belt through York, Brooktown, Narrogin, Wagin, Katanning, and 
Tambellup. From each of these centres branch lines running east are com- 
pleted or in progi'ess ; so that this portion of the wheat belt is served by one 
of the best railway systems in Australia. 

(iii.) The South-west Timber Region. 

To the ^vestward of the trunk line the rainfall increases as the south-west 
coast is approached ; the timber becomes heavier, until dense forests of 
commercial hardwoods are entered. Because of this, the wheat area does 
not extend very far westward, but the soil and rainfall are particularly well 
suited for oats ; in parts for potato growing and root crops ; and practically 
everywhere for fruit. This country is still to a great degi'ee unoccupied, 
for farming in the wheat belt has yielded quicker returns than in these 
heavily-timbered districts. It is stated, however, that a farm of 160 acres 
in the west if wisely chosen and improved will provide as good a living as 
a 1,000-acre farm in the wheat belt. 

All this country is or can be brought within convenient reach of the ports 
of Albany, Bunbury, or Busselton. Railways already cross it from Bunbury 
to Narrogin, through the coal-field of Collie. Another links Busselton to 
Katanning. A third passes through the tin-field of Greenbushes and opens 
up the forests of Bridgetown. 

The whole of this western corner is clothed either in jarrah or karri, the 
latter occurring chiefly in a coastal belt 30 miles wide from Bridgetown to 
Albany. During 1910, timber to the value of £972,000 was exported. 

Perth, the capital of Western Australia, lies in the north of this belt. 
It is situated on the estuary of the Swan River, and the hilly slopes on 
its western bank haVe been reserved as the King's Park. The Darling 
scarp— produced by the faulting of the coastal strip — -is about 20 miles 
away to the east. 

Fremantle lies at the mouth of the Swan, and in the vicinity of these 
two towns it is estimated that there are 108,000 people. 



8. Bibliography. 

LIST OF SOME PAi'ERS. ETC., DEALING WITH THE PHYSIOGRAPHY OF 

AUSTRALIA. 

Compiled by W. S. Dun, Palceontologist in the Geological Survey Branch, Mines Department, 

New South Wales. 

Andrews (E. C). Preliminary Note on the Geology of the Queensland Coast, with 

References to the Geograyihy of the (Queensland and New South Wales Plateau. 

Procs. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1902, XXV^l., pp. 14(5-185, figs. 
Notes on the Gcograjjhy of the Blue Mountains and Sydney District. Procs. 

Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, UHK], XXVIII.. pp. 780-825, pis. "39-44. 
• The Geology of the Now England Plateau, with special reference to the Granites 

of Northern New England. Pt. i. — Physiography. Records Geol. Survey 

N. S. Wales, VII., 1904, pp. 281-300. 
— An Introduction to the Physical Geography of New South Wales. (8vo. Sydney, 

1905.) 
The Ice-flood Hypothesis of the New Zealand Sound P>asins. .lourn. Geol., 1906, 

XIV., pp. 28-54. 

( '.121:14. I 



120 Federal Handbook. 



Andrews (E. C). The New Zealand Sound and Lake Basin, and the Canons of Eastern 
Australia, in the Bearing on the Theory of the Peneplain. Procs. Linn. Soc. 
N. S. Wales, 1906, XXXL, pp. 499-516, pis. 39-41. 

Corrosion by Gravity Streams with applications of the Ice-flood Hypothesis. 

Jouni. B. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1909, XLIIL, pp. 204-330. 

. Geographical Unity of Eastern Australia in Late and Post Tertiary Time, with 

applications to Biological Problems. .Joiirn. B. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1910, 
XLIV., pp. 420-479. 

Erosion and its Significance. .Journ. B. Soc. X. S. Wale-i, 1911, XLV., pp. 116- 

1.36. 

Notes on a Model of New England and the associated Topographical Forms. 

.Journ. B. Soc. X. S. Wales, 1912, XLV'I., pp. 143-15.5, pi. 3. 

Beach Formatiorts at Botany Bay. Journ. B. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1912, XLVL, 

pp. 158-185, pi. 7. 

Report on the Cobar Copper and Gold-field Part I. — Min. Res., Geol. Survey, 

N. S. Wales, No. 7. (Svo. Sydney, 1913.) 
Benson (W. N.). Notes descriptive of a Stereogram of the Mount Lofty Ranges, South 

Australia. Trans. B. Soc. S. Austr., pp. 108-111, pis. 20, 21. 
Danes (J. V.). Physiography of some Limestone Areas in Queensland. Procs. B. Soc. 

QUand, 1911, XXIIL, pp. 75-83, pis. 1, 2. 
. On the Physiography of North-Eastern Australia. Procs. B. Bohemian Soc. Sci., 

1911, XXIV. 
David (T. W. E.). An Important Geological Fault at Kurrajong Heights, New South 

Wales. Journ. B. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1902, XXXVI., pp. 359-370, pis. 16, 17. 
. . Geoloc^ical Notes on Kosciusko, with special reference to evidences of Glacial 

Action. Procs. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1908, XXXIII. , pp. 657-668, pi. 23. 
Presidential Address. Notes on some of the Chief Tectonic Lines of Australia. 

Journ. B. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1911, XLV., pp. 4-60. 
David (T W. E.) and Halligan (G. H.). Evidence of Recent Submergence of Coast at 

Nanabeen. Journ. B. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1908, XLIL. pp. 229-237, pLs. 38-39. 
David (T. W. E.), Pittman (E. F.), and Helms (R.). Geological Notes on Kosciusko, 

with special reference to evidences of Glacial Action. Procs. Linn. Soc. N. S. 

Wales, XXVI., 1901, pp. 26-74. 
Etheridge (R.), David (T. W. E.), and Grimshaw (.J. W.). On the occurrence of a 

submerged forest with the remains of a Dugong at Shea's Creek, Sydney. 

Journ. B. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1896, XXX., pp. 158-185, pLs. 8-11. 
Gregory (.J. W.). Australasia — Staivford's Geography. (8vo. London.) 
— ■ Some Features in the Geography of North- Western Tasmania. Procs. B. Soc. 

Vict., 1903, XVI. (U.S.), pp. 176-183, pLs. 

. ■ The Geography of Victoria. (8vo< Melbourne, 1903.) 

Hall (T. S.). Victorian HUl and Dale. (8vo. Melbourne, 1909.) 

Halligan (G. H.). Sand [Movement on the New South Wales Coast. Procs. Linn. Soc. 

N. S. Wale^, 1906, XXXL, pp. 619-640. pLs. 52-53. 
Harper (L. F.). Notes on the Physiography and Geology of the North-Eastem Water- 
shed of the Macquarie River. Becords Geol. Survey N. S. Wales, 1909, VIII., 

pp. 321-334, pis. 52, 53. 
Hart (T. S.). The Highlands and Main Divide of Western Victoria. Procs. B. Soc. 

Vict., 1907, X:X. (n.s.), pp. 250-273, pLs. 22-26. 

■ ■ On the Country between Melbourne and the Dandenong Creek. Procs. B. Soc. 

Vict., 1913, XXV., pp. 268-285. 
Hedley (C.) and Tay (T. G.). Coral Reef of the Great Barrier, Queensland : A Study 

of their Structure, Life Distribution, and Relation to [Mainland Physiography. 

Bept. Austr. Assoc. Adv. Science, 1907, XL, pp. 397-413. 
Howchin (W.). Description of an Old Lake Area in Pekina Creek and its Relation to 

Recent Geological Changes. Trans. B. Soc. S. Austr., 1909, XXXIIL, pp. 

253-261, pis. 17, 18. 

. The Geography of South Australia. (Svo. Melbourne, 1909.) 

■ Notes on Recurrent Transgression of the Sea at Dry Creek. Trans. B. Soc. S. 

Austr., 1912, XXX\^., pp. 34-39. 
Jensen (H. L). The Geology of the Glass House Mountains and District. Procs. Linn. 

Soc. N. S. Wales, 1903, XXVIII.. pp. 842-875, pis. 
■ Geology of the Volcanic Area of the East Moreton and Wide Bay Districts, Queeas- 

land. Procs. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1906, XXXL pp. 73-173. 
— • Preliminary Note on the Geological Historv of the Warrumbungle Mountains. 

Procs. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, pp. 228-235, pi. 19. 
Jose (A. W.), Taylor (T. G.), and Woolnough (W. G.). New South Wales : Historical, 

Physiographical and Economic. (Svo. Christchurch, 1911.) 



Physical and General Geography of Australia. 121 



JuTSON (J. T.). A contribution to the Physical History of the Plenty River and of 
Anderson's Creek, Warrandyte, Victoria. Procs. R. Soc. Vict., 1910, XXII., 
pp. 153-171, pk. 31, 32. 

On the Age and Physiographic Relations of the Older Basalts of Greensborough 

and Kangaroo Ground, and of Certain Basalts at Bundoora and Ivanhoe. 

Procs. R. Soc. Vict., 1913, XXVI. (n.s.), pp. 45-56. 
Marks (E. O.). Notes on Portion of the Burdekin VaUey, with some Queries as to the 

Universal Applicability of certain Physiographicai Theories. Procs. R. Soc. 

Q'land., 1913, XXIV., pp. 93-102, pis. 6-8, 
Murray (R. A. F.). The Geology and Physical Geography of Victoria. (8vo. Mel- 
bourne, 1887.) 
Poole (W.). Physiography of North Queensland. Repf. Aust. Assoc. Adv. Sci., 1909 

[1910], XIL, pp. 316-317. 
Selwyx (A. C). The Basin of the River Yarra and part of the Northern, North- Eastern. 

and Eastern Drainage of Westernport Bay. Notes and Procs. Leg. Council 

Vict., 1855-6, Vol. II. 
SussMiLCH (C. A.). Notes on the Physiography of the Southern Tableland of New South 

Wales. Jo2irn. R. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1909, XLIII., pp. 331-354, pis. 9-14. 
— — - — An Introduction to the Geology of New South Wales. (8vo. Sydney, 1911.) 
SxTSSMiLCH (C. A.), and Jensen (H. T.). The Geology of the Canobolas Mountains. 

Procs. Linn. Soc. N. S. TFaZes, 1909, XXXIV., pp. 157-194, pis. 7-9. 
Taylor (T. G.). A Cori'elation of Contour, Climate, and Coal. A contribution to the 

Physiography of New South Wales. Procs. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1906, 

XXXI., pp. 517-529, pLs. 45-48. 

The Physiography of Eastern Australia. BuUetiti Commonwealth Meteorological 

Bureau, No. 8, 1911. 

The Physiography of the i)roposed Federal Territory at Canberra. Comm. 

Bureau Meteorology, Bull. 6, 1910. (4to. Melbourne, 1910.) 

Australia : Physiographic and Economic. (8vo. Oxford, 1911.) 

Taylor (T. G.) and Woolnough (W. G.). A Striking Example of River Capture in the 
Coastal Districts of New South Wales. Procs. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1906, 
XXXI., pp. 517-553, pLs. 45-48. 

Wearne (R. a.) and Woolnough (W. G.). Notes on the Geology of West Moreton, 
Queensland. Jmrn. R. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1911, XLV., pp. 137-159. 



122 



Federal Handbook. 



CHAPTER IV. 

CLIMATE OF AUSTRALIA. 

Bij H. A. Hunt, F.R.Met.S., Co»i)iionwealth Meteorologist. 
SYNOPSIS. 



1. Introduction. 

2. The Seasons. 

3. Temperature. 

4. Frosts. 

5. Rainfall. 

6. Normal Monthly Distribution of 

Rain. 

7. Wettest Months. 



8. Rainfall during the 

GRowiNO Period. 

9. Snow. 

10. Evaporation. 

11. Barometric Pressure. 

12. Winds. 

13. Southerly Bursters. 

14. Hurricanes. 



Wheat- 



1. Introduction. 

Until recent years Australia was regarded by most people as a land 
especially subject to severe droughts, and by more generous critics as a 
land of a feast or a famine. 

Similar misconceptions of the true character of the country have to a 
greater or less extent been held in the developmental stages in the early 
histories of most lands, and in the colonization of newly discovered 
territories. 

In Australia past failures and losses have been due to a variety of causes ; 
amongst them may be enumerated a non-appreciation of the absence of 
natural water-storage, an ignorance of the adaptability of local soils and 
climate, unsuitable methods of working, a want of knowledge of the existence 
of an unlimited supply of artesian and sub-artesian waters, inadequate means 
of transit — -both internal and external— and an uncertain market for products. 

The staple product upon which Australia has developed is undoubtedly 
wool, and this item of commerce is still its chief export. We have not to go 
back many years to the time when the grower of wool was much in the dark 
as to the value of his crop. 

The mutton was of very little value to the producer, the demand for such 
being entirely confined to our own small population. The wool was sent to 
the home markets entirely at the grower's risk, and the price he obtained for 
it there was quite problematical. The conditions being such, there was little 
incentive to make extensive toonetary outlays for the conservation of water 
and fodder for the preservation of an asset of varying and uncertain value. 
Consequently when our seasonal dry periods came round (which are un- 
doubtedly periods of soil rest), disaster was inevitable to a more or less extent. 

Australia's commercial enterprise is on a very different basis now. With 
the perfection of refrigerating appliances, the meat markets of the world 
are open to it. The wool buyers of the world in competition give the highest 
current prices and relieve the grower of all responsibilities of transport to 
foreign markets. The squatter knows within narrow limits the value of his 
crop before it leaves the sheep's back. He therefore makes provision for 
preserving his stock, and conducts his enterprise on a business footing, in 
contrast with what was regarded in times gone by as a more or less speculative 
venture. 



Climate of Australia. 123 



The extension of railways enables the squatter to move his stock from 
seasonal dry areas to synchronous wet ones. The sinking of artesian and sub- 
artesian bores and the storage reservoirs, both national and private, have 
rendered vast areas immune from the more serious effects of droughts in 
what, formerly, was precarious territory. 

Finally it may be said that the demand for Australia's w'ool has become 
such a factor in the world's supply that if the clip is short the growers as a 
body reap compensation in the enhanced monetary value obtained. 

This fact was exemplified during the 1911-1912 clip, when a great falling 
off in quantity took place, as a result of the severest drought known in our 
climatological history over the greater part of Australian wool-producing 
areas, yet the value of the wool nearly aggregated that of the previous season, 
which had been a fairly good one. 

The vicissitudes of wheat growing tell much the same tale. The sowing 
of drought-resisting grain, dry farming methods, and scientific manuring 
have, however, brought the proposition of profitable w^heat growing from the 
problematical to the actual stage. 

The output has been steadily growing from year to year, and considering that 
nearly 500,000 square miles of the continent receive a sufficient average rainfall, 
i.e., 10 inches and over during the wheat-growing period (April to October), 
the possibilities of future development in this direction are unlimited. 

The climatic history and prosperity of the last ten years or so contradict 
emphatically the preconceived notion that Australia was the particular 
drought-stricken and precarious area of the earth's surface. The truth of 
the matter about Australia's rainfall is that — (1) it is generally ample for 
pastoral and agricultural industries over tw^o-thirds of its area ; (2) 
different regions have distinct seasonal dry and wet periods , which must 
be more fully recognised and industrial operations adapted accordingly ; 
(3) it is subject in part, but never in the whole, to prolonged periods when 
the rainfall is short of the seasonal average. Australia is not peculiar in 
this respect. It follows, therefore, that as the so far undeveloped country 
becomes populated and put to profitable use, the general wealth of the 
community as a whole will steadily increase. 

Striking illustrations supporting the above statement have been 
furnished by both Victoria and New; , South Wales since the beginning of this 
century. The losses due to shortage of rain in Gippsland during that period 
were largely mitigated by the returns from the newly-developed Mallee 
territory, and this wealth, be it said, was derived from a part of the State 
which was previously regarded as worthless. 

South-eastern New South Wales, which in earlier times largely comprised 
the developed portion of the State, sufi'ered its greatest falling off in aggregate 
rainfall during the same period, and, had it not been for agricultural and 
pastoral enterpri.se in the west and dairying developments on the north coast, 
would have experienced the effects of its record drought, instead of attain- 
ing as it did the zenith of its prosperity. 

2. The Seasons. 

The months of December, .January, and February, constitute stiinnici' ; 
March, April, and May, autumn ; June, .July, and August, winter ; and 
September, October, and November, spring. 



124 Federal Handbook. 



January is generally the hottest month and July the coldest, but February 
is the hottest month in the coastal areas of Victoria and throughout Tasmania ; 
December the warmest month in Northern Queensland ; November at Port 
Darwin ; and January and December at Broome. 

These anomalies in the northern parts of Australia are probably due to 
the cooling ejSects of the monsoon rains, which seasonally occur there during 
the late summer months. 

3. Temperature. 

Australia possesses the most pacific and equable climate of all the conti- 
nents. This is due to its geographical position, the absence of physiographi- 
cal extremes, and its insularity. Its most northern limit is 11 degrees from 
the equator, and its southern about 50 from the South Pole, distances suffi- 
ciently remote from both to temper the severity of heat and cold, to which 
is added the modifying effects of the intervening oceans. 

Jf its total area, 1,149,320 square miles are situated north of the tropic, 
and 1,825,261 square miles to the south of it. Thus it has a wide range of 
climate. In Queensland, the Northern Territory, and the northern portions 
of Western Australia, there is an unlimited opening for the growth of tropical 
products, such as rubber, cotton, sugar, etc. Suitable areas south of the 
tropic may be found for all temperate classes of vegetation, including fruit. 

January and February are the two hottest months, the mean temperatures 
ranging from 80 to 85 degrees over all the northern and central regions, 
and to 65 degrees and 70 degrees over the southern areas. Owing, however, 
to the declining angle of the sun's rays and the advent of the seasonal mon- 
soonal rains, these temperatures rapidly fall, until in July, the coldest month, 
a mean as high as 75 degrees is experienced only over a very narrow strip of 
the northern sea coast, that over the southern half being 55 degrees and under. 

During the hot months of the year the climate on the coast, except in the 
south, is invariably enervating. Inland, however, life is generally enjoyable, 
although the thermometer may, in extreme cases, reach as high as 120 degrees 
in the shade, the dryness of the air and consequent rapid cooling of the skin 
by evaporation preventing serious discomfort when protected from the 
direct rays of the sun. Nocturnal radiation, too, as contrasted with that of 
coastal districts, is very active, so that the nights are invariably cool, and an 
absence of monotony of temperature tends to a bracing of the system and to 
good sleep at night. 

During some seasons parts of the continent are subject to prolonged heat 
spells, as for example, at Marble Bar, a mining township in the north-west of 
Western Australia, where the maximum thermometer reached 100 degrees Fah. 
and over for 64 consecutive days in the year 1902. NuUagine, in the same 
region, recorded 100 degrees Fah. for 57 days in the year 1900 ; Boulia, in 
Western Queensland, 53 in 1902 ; Charlotte Waters, in the neighbourhood 
of Lake Eyre, 25 days in 1893 ; and Charleville, in Central Queensland, 20 
days in 1893. Heat of this description is, however, confined to the interior. 
The figures of the State capitals will serve for confirmation of this point. 
Perth has only experienced a maximum temperature of 90 degrees and over 
on 20 consecutive days ; Adelaide, 14 ; Melbourne and Brisbane, 8 ; Sydney, 
4 ; and Hobart, 3 ; and it may fairly be assumed that extremes of climate 
in this respect have practically been reached, as records have been kept 



Climate op Australia. 



125 




126 



Federal Handbook. 



Graph showing Mean Konthly Temperatures of Principal 
Cities in Australia. 




Note. -Each vertical space represents 2' Fahrenheit or 11° Centigrade. 

Fig. 2. 



Climate op Australia. 127 

at all the Observatories at these places, with the exception of Perth, for over 
half-a -century, a period suflS.ciently long for the establishment of temperature 
normals. 

The foregoing remarks indicate that shade temperatures alone give only 
actual temperature as experienced by dry inorganic substances and not the 
sensible temperature as felt by organic bodies. This difference is due, as 
already stated, to cooling by the evaporation of moisture from the skin by 
wind and heat, but more especially by the aetion of wind. In order, there- 
fore, to gauge the appreciable temperature of a country, it is necessary to use 
other instruments than the ordinary maximum and minimum thermometers. 
The principal additional instrument requisitioned for the desired end is the 
wet bulb thermometer. 

A number of these have been distributed throughout Australia for the 
purpose of showing the disposition and trend of the wet bulb isotherms. 
Although the period over which observations have extended is not long 
enough to determine definite normals, yet sufficient records have been 
obtained to fairly establish the influence of this climatic element. At the 
outset it may be said that in no part of Australia is the wet bulb temperature 
maintained at a reading sufficiently high to be detrimental to the health and 
physique of those engaged in outdoor labour. 

Investigations so far carried out confine the 80-degree Fah. wet bulb 
isotherm to a very narrow track of country on the north-west coast of Western 
Australia during the months of December, January, and February. 

The 70-degree Fah. isotherm only extends to sub-tropical latitudes over 
comparative small areas in Queensland and Western Australia during the 
same months and March, while in southern Australia the readings are 
from 50 degrees to 70 degrees. 

The accompanying table and graph show the average monthly and annual 
temperatures at a number of representative centres of the Commonwealth. 

Broome, Port Darwin, and Thursday Island are the hottest of these, 
and have an annual average range of 16*6 degrees, 8'3 degrees, and .5*5 
degrees respectively. The last-named is undoubtedly the most monotonously 
warm place of the continent. 

Of the capital cities Brisbane is the hottest and Hobart the coldest, the 
others taking order between them as follows : — Perth, Sydney, Adelaide, 
and Melbourne. The annual average range between the hottest and coldest 
months is about 20 degrees in all these places. 

Taking Kalgoorlie and Broken Hill to represent conditions in the interior, 
we naturally find the extremes are nmch greater — Broken Hill's maximum 
of 78-4 degrees in January falls to a minimum of 49-2 degrees in July, a 
range of 29*2 degrees; and Kalgoorlie's 77*5 degrees in January to 50-8 
degrees in July, a range of 26 '7 degrees. 

In sub-tropical areas insolation is more active over the eastern half than 
over the western during the early summer months, and more active over 
parts of the western coastal districts during the late summer months. 

In eastern Australia, too, the temperatures in the sub-tropics are about 
1 degree higher than in corresponding latitudes in the west. North of the 
tropic these conditions are reversed, and between latitudes 17 degrees to 20 
degrees the difference in excess is as much as 10 degrees in favour of tlio west 
coast. 



128 



Federal Handbook. 



t^CiOLSt^Ci'-OC-fM— ICO 



CO o 



irj o O -o <M X i> e<5 



•j.>nuiyjoe[ 


° 




X 


o 


1- 


X 


1^ 


? 


X 


9 J^l rh 


V 9 


3II 


ip '^^ (N — 

f -J J- 

1- t^ t- X X 


■.i.i((ui.iAox; 


° 




-t- 

X 


-+ 


1~ 




i^ 


cp fO S5 >p ^i 




"?" T' 9 


-i Tj( ro 00 '^ 
X ^: t f 

V= t- I^ t- X 


•Jdt[0 4J0 


= 


-j6 


X 


k 


^ 


t-^ 


~ 


X 

L'7 


in 


o o t- 


ss 


X ■+ 


3£ rt X c: -rj 

-t L- S-. -t — 

,c .= --c I- X 


•JjqTUJjdot^ 





X 


l^ 


I- 


X 


t" 


9 


X 


X 


1 )■ 

-f L- 1- 


X "M 


X •+ X 

^- iH '-4 


-+ ^ C^l t^ -M 


•jsiiSuv 


° 


i^ 


't O ^ ro X 00 

n -^ re X ro fM 

I— i": Lt '^ >^ Lt 


X 


co " O t^ r? 
L-- O — r- ;s 

-+ 1- L-I -f -t 


-M X X 5<I 'M -.C iM X 

•^ -t --C 't -+ X 






- ■-• — — I 


•■M'lr 




1- 


i^ 


9 


X 


-N 


t^ 






r V T*" 

-M X X 

-t -f -1- 


Lt -t 


-f rO <M 


-t — X — S-. 






'— '- ' • -' "^ 


-.JUUf 




i^ 


cq 

t^ 


T' 


"^3 


-t 


■^ 


;^ 


1^ 


-^- M rt 

-t ^. ^. 


x o 


-1- L": -t- 


— c; 9 X 






L. i . 1 . _ t 


■Al'It 





X 1~ 


-t 


t- 


l^ 

5 




iH 




a ■n ~i- 

-i- i-t LI 


■+ — 


111 


kkkk^ 


ludy 


= 


X 


7^ 
X 


■^ 


■^■ 


X 


-f 


5 


5 


5<l t^ L- 

r: X c: 

l~ 1- L- 


— L- 

IS m 


TC -^ ip 

>2 :* :+ 


■^^ I- <N C<l 

;= -+ 'f (M 
-^ -^ t^ t^ X 



-M -^ t^ c: X 



I- ZC >~ -^ X -^ -M O w 



-M -+ S: O re X 



f X (M 





° 


-+ -I- el 


re C-. s; ST. 


ei-fre-i-Lec-t-o-te^-ftsis 




re 1- -+ 

XXI- 


-^ ei ce I- c 
1- X 1- I- 1- 


1- 1- I- ei -t X — e-3 -t -.c s: — 
._. .^ „ .^ .^ -^ I- t- 1- t^ t^ l> X 




° 


cr. •-= 


i-e -M -t C-. 


re ce 1- -c — -^ X --c -H e<i e<i 




-f 1- re 

X X 1^ 


1 h -t X — 

t^ X t~ i^ t-- 


i-e Le t^ e<j -t t- — ' ?e t~ c<i 
--0 --c --c --C :r cs t^ t^ t^ t- r- X X 






le — X e X 



^t^-tt'- — :so — LeoOLeocoorecsiNOit-t^r- 
ayCscecitOfM-'^OfMreC:— tcre— rOTj-^^^-cece — 
i< — e^c;^ox-+ 05 — —1 — • 



— i.e — ot^ic — i^'N — c:e^om— c<iC5ise^c:e<) 

m — iSferereM— w5^ic<M — — ia-<Tj<ie ce — 

H3eii~ — rex — -fre-t-ft-t-OiO — — — 'leoe-i 
re ei — ei ce re -+ -t -t' -f -t 't -+ Tf Le i.e ue >-e o i.e 't 

xt^t-incoccQO«ceooiet~o»nc-ioicxTt*Tf 
eq Le o -^ ce ic »o ■* ce — I ue LI <M <N M i-e ue ■* <M c<i se 
• 000000000000000000000 
xiMt-— 'OM-*offli--xc^<M— 'is-rfieiMiNr^re^r 

— l-^ceee(M«ceoecocece-*■*^e^5co^e^e<^^e1 — 
^ ir 
sr. - 






Q "3 






Climate of Australia. 



129 




130 



Federal Handbook. 




Climate of Australia. 131 

4. Frosts. 

Although observations have been taken continuously for a great number 

■f years, no notes of appreciable frosts have been recorded over all the northern 

oastal regions extending from Geraldton on the west coast right round 

:he north and east coasts to Brisbane. The same remark applies to Northern 

Territory. 

In all other parts of Australia, however, night frosts are severe and 
frequent, although of considerably varying periods. 

On the highlands in New South Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania, frosts of 
J more or less damaging nature have occurred in every month of the year. 
Over a stretch of country largely comprising the wheat areas of South Aus- 
tralia, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland, they have been recorded 
between April and October. 

Over north-central and north-east Victoria, the south and central 
western slopes of New South Wales, from April to November ; over the 
Gascoyne and north-eastern parts of Western Australia and Central Australia 
from June to August.* 

In central and western Queensland from June to July, June to August, 
or May to August. 

Over the southern portion of Western Australia from April to Octobei', 
or May to September. 

For details of frost periods and distribution, see Fig. 4. 

5. Rainfall. 
Sources of Rainfall. 

The two main sources of Australian rainfall are the southern depressions 
which skirt the southern shores of the continent mainly during the winter 
months, and the tropical low pressure which operates chiefly in the 
summer months. 

A secondary but important source of supply is the anticyclone, which 
by inducing a flow of moist air from the adjacent ocean waters at any time 
during the year may bring about copious rains over the eastern littoral. 

The minor sources of rain are those of cyclones and tornadoes, but although 
these storms are characteristic of the country and result in heavy downpours, 
they cannot be regarded as staple or widespread givers of lain. 

Physical Causes of Rain. 

The condensation of watei' vaj)()ur into visible cloud form in tlie 
atmosphere is brought about generally by cooling. There are several 
known processes by which condensation results, and there may be 
other physical causes which give rise to the same effect, notably atmospheric 
electricity, but which are not at present properly understood. 

These may be enumerated as follows :■ — 

(1) The meeting of cold and wai'in cunciits of air foiiniug conden- 

sation known as fog. 

(2) Condensation by ascending currents due to convection. 

(3) Condensation by forced ascending current, i.e., air forced from 

the sea to the rising sea shore and up tlie sides of liills and 
mountains. 

• Th<'8c data won; largely gathorcd Iroin explorers' diarios. 



132 Federal Handbook. 

(4) Condensation by falling barometric pressure. 

(5) Condensation by atmospheric wave 

(6) Condensation by radiation. 

(7) Condensation due to conduction. 

(8) Condensation by diffusion of water vapour. 

These processes have only to be continued sufl&ciently long for precipi- 
tation to take place either in the form of rain, snow, or hail. 

The above definitions may be found in most meteorological text-books, 
and are only repeated here to emphasize the fact that one of the most 
important processes, at all events as far as it applies to Australian 
Meteorology, has hitherto been generally overlooked, and that is the move- 
ment of air from warm to cool latitudes and zones causing condensation and 
finally bounteous precipitation over vast areas, with more or less disregard to 
the influence of land elevation or of barometric fluctuations. 

During the present year, 1913, many examples of this phenomenon 
have occurred, and the break up of the dry spell over eastern Australia in 
June, 1912, was a conspicuous one. 

The characteristic isobaric conditions which precede or accompany this 
form of rain production are anticyclones of great dimensions and of consider- 
able intensity, covering the eastern half of Australia, and perhaps an equal 
area of the ocean to the east. Their western isobars are comparatively 
straight, extending from the Indian Ocean east from the meridian of Port 
Darwin to the Southern Ocean east of Spencer's Gulf. The following and 
attending areas of the low pressure generally take the form of a shallow 
trough or valley in the atmosphere extending through the centre of Australia 
from the northern to the southern seaboards. It wiU thus be seen that a 
direct and rapid wind circulation control extends from the equatorial zone to 
temperate latitudes resulting in conditions particularly favorable for wide- 
spread and heavy downpours. 

The rainy season in Western Australia may be said to result almost 
solely from this physical action. 

The rain-bearing winds are northerly, precipitation becoming heavier as 
higher latitudes are reached. 

Over Papua the reverse action takes place ; during the dry season the 
winds are strong and persistent from the south-east quarter, blowing from 
cool to warmer latitudes. The water vapour carried by these winds is there- 
fore expanded instead of precipitated. 

On the occasion of the rain storm of June, 1912, it is estimated from this 
cause of precipitation that an inch of rain on the average fell over an area 
approximating 1,000,000 square miles of eastern Australia, or a weight 
of water roughly equivalent to 1.000,000 x 640 x 100 = 64,000,000,000 
tons. 

The knowledge that rain visitations of this character are not infrequent 
completely dispels the preconceived notion of Australia being a particularly 
dry area of the earth's surface, and shews that although our rain seasons 
may be irregular, yet relief from dry spells may occur, as in the case quoted, 



Climate of Australia. 



133 



at times long after the normal period for rain has passed. This peculiarity is 
a great advantage and a happy feature of Australian climate ; and very 



different from conditions, say, for 
example, that obtain in India — where, if 
the monsoon season fails to bring rain, 
very little hope of relief can be looked for. 

Before finally leaving this point, it 
may definitely be accepted that any 
isobaric distribution that controls a 
strong wind circulation from warm to 
cool areas, more especially from warm 
to cool latitudes, will bring about good 
rains, and, moreover, that the recur- 
rence of such isobaric distributions are 
t}'pical events of good seasons. (See 
Fig. 5.) 

On the other hand, extensive 
isobaric distributions that control a 
wind circulation from cool to warm 
zones or latitudes, or that control a 
wind circulation along parallels of 
latitude, will bring little or no rain 
except in opposing coastal areas. 
These distributions predominate during 
and are tvpical of a dry season. (See 
Fig. 6.) 



I3*0ctl89i 




2T*Uulijmo 



Isobaric Di.stribution 
(wet type). 




Fig. 6.- 



-IsoBAEic Distribution 
(dry type). 



6. The Normal Monthly Distribution of Rain. 

A set of charts illustrating the monthly progress of rainfall in Australia has 
recently been published. Those of January and July, together with one for 
the whole year, are here reproduced. They were compiled from data extending 
over a considerable period, generally from 20 to 40 years (there being 
only a few stations with a minimum of fifteen years' record), so that the 
isohyets are likely to suffer little modification in the future. 

A casual glance at the series reveals three marked facts — (1) that during 
the hotter months, viz., November to April inclusive, the northern parts of 
Australia are wet and the southern dry ; (2) that during the colder months 
viz.. May to October inclusive, the southern parts are wet, and the northern 
dry ; (3) that the rainfall is distributed fairly generally throughout the 
year over the eastern areas of Australia. 

During January and February fully three-fourths of the continent, com- 
prising the whole of the northern and eastern areas, are wet, while the central, 
southern, and south-western portions are distinctly dry. In March, there 
is a general retreat northward of the rainfall area to the extent of 200 miles 
in Western Australia, a slight extension westward in the south-east quarter 
of the continent, and in Western Australia the 1-in. isohyetal appears on the 
extreme south-west coast. 



13i Federal Handbook. 



In April the northern rain area retreats in central Australia from the tropic 
to within 300 miles of the north coast, although still lagging over the north- 
west coast of Western Australia and the Murchison gold-fields. 

In the south a decided westerly extension takes place from the south- 
eastern States to South Australia and Western Australia, the 1-in. isohyetal 
sweeping continuously around the southern shores with the exception of a 
short break at the head of the Great Bight. 

The northern rain entirely disappears in May, and the southern extends 
up the west coast of Western Australia to within a few miles of Cossack, 
and the quantities increase as compared with those of the previous month by 
4 inches in the extreme south-west corner. 

June, the wettest month of the year for southern Australia, shows a com- 
plete reversal of January rain conditions. In Western Australia precipita- 
tion is general during this month west of a line joining Derby and Ep'e. 
and in South Australia the 1-in. isohyet reaches its furthest northern limit 
in close proximity to Farina. 

From July to December it may be remarked that the rain area as a whole 
swings back in the opposite direction to its march during the first six months. 

On the west coast the 1-in. line steps back to Onslow in July ; to Hamelin 
Pool in August ; to Geraldton in September ; still farther south in October ; 
and all but disappears in the extreme south-west in November ; so that 
little or nothing is left in December. While this retreating process is taking 
place in the west, a corresponding advance movement is going on in the 
east. Between the end of June and the end of August there is little change, 
but from September to the end of the year the expansion of area and quantity 
of rain increases rapidly. October shows the return of the monsoon rain in 
Northern Territory. In November it has penetrated 450 miles further into 
the interior and connected up with the permanent rain area over eastern 
Australia. 

In December, the monsoon rain covers practically the whole of the conti- 
nent north of the Tropic, and east of the 144th meridian. 

We find, therefore, that there exists apparently an oscillatory movement 
of the seasonal rains of Australia about a centre in the vicinity of Forbes, 
in New South Wales. It is perhaps a natural coincidence that this apparent 
centre of oscillation is approximately the centre of gravity of Australia's 
population, and is not far from the Federal capital site ; another interesting 
point is that the amplitude of oscillation exactly equals 72 degrees of arc or 
one-fifth of a circle. 

7. Wettest Months. 

Roughlv speaking, June is the wettest month over that portion of Aus- 
tralia lying to the south of a line joining Onslow on the north-west coast 
of Western Australia and Sydney on the east coast. 

To the north of that line, January commands the greatest claim as the 
wettest month, although February runs it very closely over a wide belt of 
country extending from the lower Northern Territory through south-west 
Queensland to northern parts of New South Wales. March also is the 



Climate op Australia. 



135 




111 

i j I !'l J 



136 



Federal Handbook. 



Graph showing Mean Monthly Rainfall of Principal Cities 

in Australia. 




Note. — Each vertical space represents "5 of an inch or 12" 7 millimetres. 

Fig. 8. 



Climate op Australia. 



137 



wettest month in parts of central Queensland, parts of central New South 
Wales, and over a comparatively small area on the north-west coast of Western 
Australia. 

As would naturally be expected, at the junction of the summer and winter 
rains, which is represented by the line above mentioned crossing the conti- 
nent from north-west to south-east, the wettest month is somewhat inde- 
terminate. This point is particularly noticeable in the State of New South 
Wales, through which the line centrally passes, for within its boundaries 
every month with the exception of September is represented as the wettest 
month in some part or other, with a preponderance, as before stated, for 
June in the southern half, and January, February, and March in the northern 
half, as the months of heaviest total falls. 





Heavy Rainfalls, 


Western Australia. 




Name of Town or 


Date. 


5 Xanic of Town or 




a 


Locality. 


S 1 Locality. 


Date. 


o 

a 

< 






inches. 




inches. 


Ascott . . 


8 Feb., 1912.. 


8 "So La Grange 


21 Dec, 1905 


7-61 


„ . . 


9 Feb., 1912.. 


.5-85 


Millstream 


5 Mar., 1900 


10-00 


Balla BaUa 


20 Mar., 1899 


6-00 


Obagama 


16 Feb., 1896 


3-95 


,, 


21 Mar., 1899 


14-40 


.. 


17 Feb., 1896 


6-30 


Bamboo Creek 


22 Mar., 1899 


10-10 


.. 


18 Feb., 1896 


7-22 


Boodarie 


.3 Jan., 1894.. 


10-03 


» 


28 Feb., 1910 


12-00 


,, 


4 .Jan., 1894.. 


.3 -22 


Point Cloates 


20 Jan., 1909 


10-87 




21 Mar., 1899 


14-53 


Point Torment 


17 Dec, 1906 


11-86 




Feb., 1901.. 


1-91 


Port Hedland 


7 Feb., 1901.. 


3-56 


,, 


7 Feb., 1901.. 


9-16 


., 


8 Feb., 1901 . . 


9-55 


Carlton . . 


11 .Ian., 190.-3 


10-64 


Quanbun 


29 Apr., 1910 


6-55 


,, . . 


8 Feb., 1912.. 


9-05 


>s . ■ 


30 Apr., 1910 


3-40 


,, . . 


9 Feb., 1912.. 


3-15 


Roebourne 


3 Apr., 1898.. 


11-44 


Cherrabun 


28 Apr., 1910 


2-90 


„ 


6 Mar., 1900 


10-32 


„ 


29 Apr., 1910 


7-78 


Tambrev 




11-00 


Cocos Island 


29 Nov., 1903 


14-38 


» ' 


3 Siar., 1903 


10-47 




2t) Dee., 1907 


8-00 


Thangoo 


17-19 Feb., 


24-18 




27 Dee., 1907 


2 -65 I 




1896 






8 ,Julv, 1908.. 


10-21 


>) 


28 Dec, 1898 


11-15 




9 .luly, 1908.. 


2-75' 


>> • • 


20 Nov., 1910 


7-40 




23 July, 1908 


2-40 


>> • • 


21 Nov., 1910 


4-56 




24 July, 1908 


7-oo: 


Whim Creek 


2 Apr., 1898.. 


7-08 


,. 


2.i .lulV, 1908 


3-85 


,, 


3 Apr., 1898.. 


29 -41 


>. 


6 Oct.,^ 1910 . . 


12-70 


,, 


20 Mar., 1899 


8-89 


Cossack 


3 Apr., 1898.. 


12-82 




21 Mar., 1899 


18-17 


• > 


].') Apr., 1!)(J(» 


6-89 


., 


() Mar., 1900 


10-32 


., 


10 Apr., 1900 


13-23 


;> ■ • 


3 Mar., 1903 


10-44 


Croydon 


3 Mar., 1903 


12-00 


Woocistock 


21 Mar., 1913 


13-00 


De Grey 


3 Jan., 1894.. 


9-75 


Wyndhani 


27 Jan., 1890 


1 1 -60 


Derby . . 


29 Dec., 1898 


13-09: 


)> • • 


11 Jan., 1903 


9-98 


,, 


30 Dec, 1898 


7-14 


,. 


12 Jan., 1903 


6-64 


Fortescuc 


3 May, 1890 


23 -36 ' 


>> 


13 Jan., 1903 


4-20 


Indee . . 


22 Mar., 1890 


5 -08 , 


Yeeda . . 


28 Dec, 1898 


8-42 


,. 


23 .Mar., 1890 


5 -40 


,, 


29 Dec, 1898 


6-88 


Kfrdifuian- 


7 Feb., 1901 . . 


12-00 


,, 


30 Dec, 1898 


6-12 


La Grange 


20 Dec., 190r> 


3-70 









138 



Federal Handbook. 



Heavy Eainfalls, South Australia. 



Name of Town or 




i 


1 

Name ot Town or 




1 


Locality. 






Locality. 


Date. 


o 

< 






inches. 






inches. 


Arltuaga 


1 Mar., 1910 


1-02 


Port Darwin 


7 .Jan., 1897.. 


11-67 


„ 


2 Mar., 1910 


1-42 


1 „ 


26 Dec., 1911 


1-42 


» • • 


3 Mar., 1910 


7-77 


I 


27 Dec., 1911 


7-87 


•> • • 


4 Mar., 1910 


1-85 


,» • • 


28 Dec, 1911 


2-06 


5> • ■ 


.3 Mar., 1910 


1-24 


Powell's Creek 


25 Feb., 1910 


2-31 


Borroloola 


U Mar., 1899 


14-00 




26 Feb., 1910 


1-21 


Lake Nash 


21 Mar., 1901 


10-25 




27 Feb., 1910 


8-19 


Pine Creek 


8 .Jan.. 1897.. 


10-35 


Tennant's Creek . . 


26 Feb., 1910 


1-18 


Point Charles 


.30 Jan., 191,3 


4-46 




27 Feb., 1910 


1-02 


» • ■ 


31 Jan., 1913 


5-60 




28 Feb., 1910 


9-22 



Heavy Rainfalls, Queensland. 



Name of Town or 
Locality. 



Anglesey 

Ascot 

Ayr 



Babinda 
Beenleigh 

Bloomsbury 



Boggo-road June 

tion 
Botanic Gardens 

Brisbane 
Bowen . . 

Bowen Park 

Brisbane 

Bromby Park 
(Bowen) 

Brookfield 
Buderim Mountain 

Bulimba (Brisbane) 

Bundaberg 

Burketown 

Bustard Head 

Caboolture 

Cairns . . 



Date. 



26 Dec 
14 Mar. 

20 Sept 

25 Mar. 

26 .Jan. 
17 Mar. 

21 .Jan. 
14 Mar. 
14 Feb. 

27 Jan. 
10 Jan.. 
4 Mar., 
9 Jan., 
14 Mar 



13 Feb. 

20 -Jan. 
16 Feb. 

14 Mar. 

21 Jan. 
14 Mar. 
14 Feb. 

20 Jan. 

14 Mar. 

11 Jan. 

9 Mar., 
16 Feb. 
31 Jan. 

15 Jan. 

12 Mar. 
18 Feb. 
30 Jan. 

21 Jan. 

10 .Jan. 

11 Feb. 
21 Apr. 



1909 
, 1908 
1890 
1891 
1896 
1912 
1887 
1908 
, 1893 
, 1896 
, 1901 
1906 
1908.. 
, 1908 



1893 
1894 
1893 
1908 
1887 
1908 
1893 

1894 
1908 
1898 
1898 
1893 
1893 
1891 
1903 
1888 
1893 
1887 
1898 
1889 
1889 



inches. 
18-20 
11-34 
14-58 
10-19 
10-50 
10-15 
11-30 
10-40 
17-40 
10-52 
16-62 
11-36 
11-30 
10-42 

10-80 

14-65 
11-11 
10 -.38 
11 -.50 
18-31 
11-18 
13-28 

11-20 
14-95 
26-20 
11-10 
10-40 
10-15 
13-58 
14 -.52 
10-14 
11-85 
in -00 
10-28 
14-74 
12-40 



Name of Town or 
Locality. 



Cairns 



Caloundra 
Cape Capricorn 
Cape Grafton 
Cardwell 



Cedar Pocket 
Central Kin Kin 
Chiefswood 
Childers . . 
Clare 
Cleveland 

Coen 

Collaroy 

Cooktown 



Cooran 



Cooroy 



Cressbro ik 



Date. 



5 Apr., 
9 Jan., 

4 Jan., 
3 Jan., 
11 Feb. 
17 Mar. 

1 Apr., 

2 Apr., 

21 Jan. 

17 Jan, 

5 Mar., 

18 Mar. 
30 Dec. 

2 Jan., 
23 Mar 

18 Mar. 

3 Apr., 
7 Apr., 
26 Dec. 

14 Mar. 

6 Mar., 
26 Jan. 
13 Jan. 
2 June, 
20 Apr. 
1 Apr., 
30 Jan. 
30 Jan 

22 Jan 

19 Jan. 
1 Apr., 
1 Feb., 
9 June, 
26 Dec. 

9 June, 

10 Jan. 
6 Mar., 
16 Feb. 



1891.. 

1892.. 

1909.. 

1911.. 
, 1911 
, 1911 

1911.. 

1911.. 
, 1887 
, 1905 

1896 
, 1887 
, 1889 

1890.. 
, 1890 
, 1904 

1911.. 

1912.. 
, 1909 

, 1898 

1898 
, 1896 
, 1910 
, 1910 
, 1903 

1910.. 
, 1896 
, 1910 
, 1903 
, 1907 

1911.. 

1893.. 

1893 
, 1908 

1893 
, 1898 

1898 
, 1893 



Climate op Australia. 



139 



Heavy Rainfalls, Queensland — continued. 



Name of Town or 


Dato 


1 


Name of Town or 


Datp 


s 

3 
O 


Locality. 






< 


Locality. 


- 






s 

< 








inches. 








inches. 


Crohamhurst 


31 Jan., 


1893 


10-78 


Goondi Mill (near 


25 Jan. 


1892 


11-10 


(Blackall Range) 








Innisfail) 










2 Feb., 


1893.. 


35-71 


» >> 


6 Apr., 


1894.. 


15-69 




9 June, 


1893 


13-31 


., 


7 Mar., 


1899 


10-08 




9 Jan., 


1898.. 


19-55 


» 


18 Apr. 


1899 


14-78 




6 Mar., 


1898 


16-01 


„ 


24 Jan. 


1900 


13-30 




2G Dec. 


1909 


13-85 


.. 


6 Jan., 


1901.. 


10-70 


Crow's Nest 


2 Aug., 


1908 


11-171 


>» ,, 


2 Mar., 


1901 


10-67 


Croydon 


29 Jan. 


1908 


15-00i 


,, ,, 


29 Dec. 


1903 


17-83 


Cryna (Beaudesert) 


21 Jan. 


1887 


14-00 


,, ,, 


17 Mar. 


, 1904 


10-00 


Dungeness 


16 Mar. 


1893 


22-17 


,, ,, 


21 Mar. 


, 1910 


10-38 




19 Jan. 


1894 


11-84 


». 


10 Feb. 


1911 


17-68 




17 Apr. 


1894 


14-00 


„ 


31 Mar. 


, 1911 


12-38 


Dunira . . 


9 Jan., 


1898.. 


18-45 


,, ,, 


1 Apr., 


1911.. 


13-60 




6 Mar., 


1898 


15-95 


,, 


6 Apr., 


1912.. 


15-55 


Eddington (Clon- 


23 Jan. 


, 1891 


10-33 


Granada (late 


27 Jan. 


. 1891 


11-29 


curry) 








Donaldson) 






Emu Park 


31 Jan. 


, 1893 


10-00 


; 8 Jan., 


1911.. 


13-50 


Enoggera Railway 


U Mar. 


, 1908 


12-14 


„ 


9 Jan., 


1911.. 


14-30 


Enoggera Reservoir 


,, 


jj 


10-98 


Gympie 


9 Mar., 


1901 


11-64 


Ernest Junction . . 


„ 


j^ 


13-00 


Halifax 




5 Feb., 


1899.. 


15-37 


Esk 


21 Jan. 


, 1887 


10-70 






8 Mar., 


1899 


11-00 




14 Mar. 


, 1908 


11-12 






6 Jan., 


1901.. 


15-68 


Fassifern 


21 Jan. 


, 1887 


lfl-20 






8 Feb., 


1901.. 


10-50 


Flat Top Island . . 


22 Dec. 


, 1909 


12-96 


,, 




26 Mar. 


, 1903 


10-07 


Flora ville 


6 Jan., 


1897.. 


10-79 






30 Jan. 


, 1906 


10-41 


» 


11 Mar. 


, 1903 


12-86 


'I 




8 Apr., 


1912.. 


12-75 


Flying Fish Point 


7 Apr., 


1912.. 


16-06 


Hambledon Mill 




7 Jan., 


1908.. 


11-00 


Geraldton (now In- 


11 Feb. 


, 1889 


17-13 


' ■'•■i, ' M 




13 Jan. 


, 1909 


13-80 


nisfail) 








1 •■ ■ -.I, ■ 






16 Feb. 


, 1910 


11-45 


,, 


31 Dec. 


, 1889 


12-45 


' I j', 






2 Jan., 


1911.. 


18-61 






25 Jan. 


, 1892 


11-10 


" 






10 Feb. 


, 1911 


13-97 


'„ 




6 Apr., 


1894.. 


16-02 








30 Mar 


, 1911 


13-04 






3 Mar., 


1896 


11-42 


'' 






31 Mar 


, 1911 


14-95 


[[ 




7 Mar., 


1899 


10-25 








1 Apr., 


1911.. 


19-62 


„ 




18 Apr. 


, 1899 


13-20 


Harvey Creek 




8 Mar., 


1899 


17-72 


^^ 




24 Jan. 


, 1900 


15-22 






25 Jan. 


, 1900 


12-53 






6 Jan., 


1901.. 


11-35 


!! " 




25 Mav 


, 1901 


14-00 






29 Dec. 


, 1903 


21-22 


,. 




14 Mar 


, 1903 


12-10 


„ 




17 Mar. 


, 1904 


10 -.35 






21 Apr. 


, 1903 


10-10 


„ 




30 Jan. 


, 1908 


11-76 






11 Jan. 


, 1905 


16-96 


,, 




14 Jan. 


, 1909 


11-65 






28 Jan. 


, 1906 


12-29 


„ 




11 Feb. 


, 1911 


14-48 


,! 




20 Jan. 


, 1907 


10-13 


„ 




1 Apr., 


1911.. 


12 '35 






8 Jan., 


1908.. 


10-31 


,. 




2 Apr., 


1911.. 


15-00 






30 Jan. 


, 1908 


11-31 


„ 




3 Apr., 


1911.. 


11-25 






25 Mar 


, 1908 


11-84 


„ 




7 Apr., 


1912.. 


20-50 






14 Jan. 


, 1909 


14-40 


„ 




8 Apr., 


1912.. 


12-15 






16 Feb. 


, 1910 


10-90 


Gin Gin . . 


KJ Jan. 


, imry 


13-61 






3 Jan., 


1911.. 


27-75 


Gladstone 


18 Feb. 


, 1888 


12-37 






11 Feb. 


, 1911 


12-88 


>> • • 


31 Jan. 


, 1893 


14-62 






31 Mar 


, 1911 


10-93 


jj 


4 Feb., 


191].. 


18-83 






1 Apr., 


1911.. 


13-61 


Glass Mountains . . 


26 Dec. 


, 1909 


10-48 






2 Apr., 


1911.. 


16-46 


Glen Broughton . . 


5 Apr., 


1894. . 


18-50 






17 Mar 


, 1912 


10-15 


Glen Prairie 


18 Apr. 


, 1904 


12-18 


Haii^'litnii Valley 


2() Jan 


, 1896 


18-10 


Gold Creek Reser- 


16 Feb. 


, 1893 


11-16 


Miilcrcsl (.Moofoo- 


2(5 Dec 


, 1909 


13-35 


voir 








lah) 








,, ,, 


14 Mar. 


, 1908 


12 -.50 


llolinwood (Wood- 


•1 Feb., 


1893.. 


16-19 


Goodna 


21 Jan. 


, 1887 


1 1 -00 


ford) 








„ 




14 Mar 


. 1908 


11-03 


., 






10 .Ian 


, 1898 


12-40 



140 



Federal Handbook. 



Heavy Eainfalls, Queensland — continued. 



Name of Town or 
Locality. 



Homebush 



Howar.l 

Indooroopilly 

Ingham 



Inkerman 
Inneslioweu (.John 

tone River) 
Innisfail 

Inskip Point 
Isis Junction 
Kamerunga 

(Cairns) 



Kilkivan Junction 
Kululu, Mackay 

Kuranda 



Lake Nash 
Landsborough 

Low Island 

Lucinda 
Lytton . . 



Date. 



3 Feb., 
21 Mar. 
11 Jan., 
15 Jan. 
14 Mar. 
18 Jan., 
7 Apr., 
6 .Jan., 
25 Dec, 
21 Sept. 
30 Dec, 



1898.. 
, 1898 

1901 
. 1905 
, 1908 

1894 
1894.. 
1901.. 

1903 
, 1890 

1889 



7 Apr. 1912 . 

8 Ap . 1912 . 
13 Mar., 1892 
6 Mar., 1898 
20 Jan., 1892 



23 Feb. 
(5 Apr., 
5 Apr., 
5 Mar., 

8 Mar., 
21 Apr. 

2 -Jan., 

3 .Jan., 
11 Feb. 
17 Mar. 

1 Apr., 

2 Apr., 

10 Jan. 

11 Jan. 

12 Jan. 
(5 Mar., 
20 Apr. 
14 Jan. 

27 Jan. 

28 Jan 

3 Jan., 
11 Feb 
17 Mar. 
31 Mar. 

1 Apr., 

2 Apr., 
10 Jan. 

20 Mar. 
2 Feb., 

9 June, 

9 Jan., 
7 Mar., 
26 Dec. 

10 Mar. 

16 Mar. 
31 Mar. 
1 Apr., 

4 Feb., 

17 Feb. 
10 Mar. 

21 .Jan. 

13 Mar. 



, 1894 

1894.. 

1895.. 

1896 

1899 
, 1903 

1911.. 

1911.. 
, 1911 
, 1911 

1911.. 

1911.. 
, 1898 
, 1901 
, 1905 

1899 
, 1903 
, 1909 
, 1910 
, 1910 

1911.. 
, 1911 
, 1911 
, 1911 

1911.. 

1911.. 
, 1895 
. 1901 

1893.. 

1893 

1898.. 

1898 
, 1909 
, 1904 
, 1911 
, 1911 

1911.. 

1899.. 
, 1906 
, 1906 
, 1887 
1892 



inches. 
12-04 
10-26 
11-40 
19 -55 
10-28 
12-60 
10-10 
13-59 
12-30 
12-93 
14-01 

20-50 
12-15 
10-65 
13-60 
13-61 

10-10 
14-04 
12-31 
11-81 
10-50 
11-75 
10-95 
10-25 
13-07 
10-30 
14-20 
21-00 
11-08 
11-70 
10-94 
14-12 
14-16 
12-37 
9-40 
9-28 
10-72 
16-30 
15-10 
18-60 
24-30 
28-80 
10-25 
10-02 
15-15 
12-80 
9-54 
10-35 
14-00 
15-07 
10-15 
14-70 
15-30 
11-10 
13-35 
14-60 
12-85 
10-60 



Name of Town or 
Locality. 



Lytton 
Mackay 



Sugar Experimen- 
tal Farm, Mac- 
kay 

Macnade Mill 

(Townsville) 



Maleny . . 

Manly 
Mapleton 



Mareeba 
Marlborough 

Mayne Junction 

Mein 

Milton 

Mirani 

Mollov 



Monkira 
Mooloolah 



Morningside 
Mount Crosby 
Mount Cuthbert 
Mount Gravatt 
Mount Perry 
Mourilyan 



Mundoolun 
Mungar Junction 
Murrarie 
Musgrave 
Nambour 



Date. 



16 Feb. 
20 Mar. 

17 Feb. 
15 Feb., 
3 F b., 
5 Jan., 
23 Dec, 
12 Mar. 
23 Dec, 



, 1893 
, 1898 
, 1888 

1893 
1898.. 
1904.. 

1909 
, 1910 

1909 



28 Mar., 1891 



15 Mar. 
18 Jan. 
17 Apr. 

5 Feb., 

6 Jan., 
14 Mar. 
26 Dec. 
14 Mar. 
14 Mar, 

26 Dec. 
4 Feb., 
31 Mar. 

17 Feb. 

29 Jan. 
14 Mar. 
4 Apr., 
14 Mar. 

12 Jan. 
28 Mar. 

16 Mar. 

30 Mar. 

31 Mar. 

1 Apr., 

2 Apr., 

1 Feb., 

13 Mar. 

2 Feb., 

9 June, 

6 Mar., 

14 Mar. 
14 Mar 

18 Jan. 
14 Mar. 
24 Feb. 
14 Jan. 

3 Jan., 
11 Feb. 

1 Apr., 

2 Mar., 

7 Apr., 
21 Jan. 

10 Mar. 
14 Mar. 

6 Apr., 
9 Jan., 

7 Mar., 

27 Dec. 



, 1893 
, 1894 
, 1894 
1899.. 
1901.. 
, 1908 
, 1909 
, 1908 
,, 1908 
, 1909 
1911.. 
, 1911 
, 1888 
, 1896 
, 1908 
1895.. 
, 1908 
, 1901 
, 1903 
, 1911 
, 1911 
, 1911 
1911.. 
1911.. 
1906.. 
, 1892 
1893.. 
1893 
1898 
, 1908 
. 1908 
, 1911 
, 1908 
, 1887 
, 1909 
1911.. 
, 1911 
1911 
1911.. 
1912.. 
, 1887 
, 1901 
, 1908 
1894.. 
1898.. 
1898 
, 1909 



Climate op Australia. 



141 



Heavy Eainfalls, Queensland — continued. 



Name of Town or 
Locality. 


Date. 


p 

o 
£ 
< 


Name of Town or 
Locality. 


Date. 


a 

9 

1 
< 






inches. 






inches. 


Nanango 


9 June, 1893 


10-00 


Tabragalba 


21 Jan., 1887 


10-00 


Nerango 


15 June, 1892 


12-35 


Tallebudgera 


14 Mar., 1908 


10-80 




14 Mar., 1908 


10-95 


Tambourine Moun- 


17 July, 1889 


10-91 


Netley (Rockhamp- 


29 Jan., 1896 


11-77 


tain 






ton) 






Taringa 


14 Mar., 1908 


11-40 


Normantoii 


14 Jan., 1905 


10-72 


Tewantin 


10 Jan., 1898 


10-51 


North Pine 


11 Jan., 1887 


11-60 


„ 


30 Mar., 1904 


12-30 


,, 


16 Feb., 1893 


14-97 


., . • 


14 Apr., 1904 


11-36 


Nundah.. 


14 Mar., 1908 


12-00 


The Hollow (Mac- 


23 Feb., 1888 


15-12 


One Mile, Gympie 


10 Mar., 1901 


11-40 


kay) 






Oxenford 


14 Mar., 1908 


15-65 


>» 


— Mar., 1891 


10-39 


Palmwoods 


4 Feb., 1893.. 


12-30 


Thornborough 


20 Apr., 1903 


18-07 




10 Jan , 1898 


15-85 


Tierawoomba 


2 Feb., 1898.. 


10-36 


M 


7 Mar., 1898 


13-02 


Tooloombah 


29 Jan., 1896 


11-70 




25 Dec, 1909 


17-75 


Toowong 


14 Mar., 1908 


11-60 


., 


3 Mar,. 1912 


10-00 


Townsville 


24 Jan., 1892 


19-20 


Peachester 


26 Dec, 1909 


14-91 




28 Dec, 1903 


15-00 


Pinkenba 


14 Mar., 1908 


11-63 


Victoiia Mill 


6 .Jan., 1901.. 


16-67 


Pittsworth 


11 Mar., 1890 


14-68 


Walkerston 


12 Jan., 1905 


10-60 


Port Douglas 


15 Mar., 1887 


13-00 


Walsh River 


12 Jan., 1903 


10-22 


»> ■ • 


12 Feb., 1888 


10-00 


,, 


1 Apr., 1911.. 


13-70 


» 


20 Jan., 1892 


11-50 


Woodford 


2 Feb., 1893.. 


14-93 




23 F b., 1894 


10-25 ! 




10 Jan., 1898 


11-40 




7 Apr., 1894 


10-00 


Woodlands (Yep- 


10 Jan., 1889 


K^ -00 


>> 


10 Mar., 1904 


16-34 


poon) 






» 


29 Dec, 1904 


10-67 


>> 


26 Jan, 1890 


10-22 




11 Jan., 1905 


14-68 




25 Mar., 1890 


14-25 


„ 


2 Jan., 1911.. 


11-64 


", ',', 


31 Jan., 1893 


23-07 


,. 


11 Feb., 1911 


11-88 




30 Jan., 1896 


11-91 




7 Mar., 1911 


16-10 




9 Feb., 1896.. 


13-97 


',', 


1 AprU, 1911 


31 -53 


',', '„ 


7 .Jan., 1898.. 


14-50 


Ravenswood 


24 Mar., 1890 


17-00 


Woodstock 


4 Nov.. 1903 


10-44 


•> 


27 .Jan., 1896 


10-52 


Woogaroo 


14 Mar., 1908 


11-20 


Redcliffe 


21 Jan., 1887 


14-00 


Woombye 


26 Dec, 1909 


13-42 


!> ■ • 


16 Feb., 1893 


17 -.35 


Wynnum 


14 Mar., 1908 


11-95 


»J • • 


10 Jan., 1898 


10-25 


Yandina 


1 Feb., 1893.. 


20-08 


Riverview 


14 Mar., 1908 


10-12 


„ 


9 June, 1893 


12-70 


Rockhamptou 


17 Feb., 1888 


10-82 


»? • • 


9 Jan., 1898.. 


19-25 


)> . . 


29 Jan., 1896 


10 -.33 


» 


7 Mar., 1898 


13-52 


Rosedale 


6 Mar., 1898 


12-60 




28 Doc, 1909 


15-80 


Sand gate 


21 .Jan.. 1887 


10-50 


Yarrabah 


14 Jan., 1909 


11-20 


„ 


16 Feb., 1893 


14-03 


,, 


3 Jan., 1911.. 


11-50 


Sherwood 


14 Mar., 1908 


1 1 -08 


,, 


11 Feb., 1911 


12-00 


Somerset 


28 Jan., 1903 


12-02 


,, 


2 Apr., 1911 


30-65 


Southport 


14 Mar., 1908 


1 i -05 


Ye|tpoon 


31 Jan., 1893 


20-05 


St. Helena 


16 Feb., 1893 


1! -20 


>, 


30 Jan., 1896 


11-02 


St. Helen.s(Mackay) 


24 Feb., 1888 


!2-(tli 


>) • • 


8 Jan., 1898.. 


18-05 


)» ,, 


22 Mar., 1898 


10-00 


.» 


8 Apr., 1904.. 


10-70 


St. Lawrence 


17 Feb., 1888 


12-10 


» 


3 l^eb., 1900.. 


14-90 


»> • * 


.30 Jan., 1896 


15-00 


.1 


3 Feb., 1911.. 


14-92 


Sunnybank 


14 Mar., 1908 


11-40 


Zillmere 


14 Mar., 1908 


11-00 



C. 12154. 



142 



Federal Handbook. 



Heavy Rainfalls, New South Wales. 



Name of Town or 
Locality. 


Date. 


B' 1 

§• Amount. 


Name of Town or 
Locality. 


Dat«. 


a 
o 
c 
< 










inches. 


Albion Park 


8 Feb., 1895.. 


10-00 Leconfield 


9 Mar., 1893 


14-53 


Albury . . 


U Feb., 1898 


10-70 Liverpool 


23 Feb., 1874 


10-39 


Alme Dorrigo 


22 Jan., 1893 


10-27 jMacksviUe* 


23 Feb., 1908 


10-00 


Anthony 


28 Mar., 1887 


17-14 Madden's Creek . 


2 F'b., 1908.. 


10-36 


>> . . 


15 Jan., 1890 


13-13 


13 Jan., 1911 


18-(8 


Arnold Grove 


28 May, 1889 


11-13 Maitland West . 


9 Mar., 1893 


14-79 


>> • ■ 


20 Mar., 1892 


10-08 


Major's Creek 


14 Feb., 1898 


12-32 


Araluen 


14 Feb., 1898 


10-51 


Marrickville 


9 Mar., 1913 


10-40 


)> • • 


15 Feb., 1898 


13-36 


Milton . . 


13 Jan., 1911 


10-41 


Bellawongarah 


13 Jan., 1911 


10-92 


Mittagong 


6 Mar., 1893 


11-71 


Berry 


,, ,, 


12-05 


Morpeth 


9 Mar., 1893 


21-52 


Billa nbil 


14 Mar., 1894 


12-94 


Mount Kembla . 


14 Feb., 1898 


10-25 


Bo'naderry 


13 Jan., 1911 


13-03 


1 ,, 


2 Feb., 1908.. 


10-27 


Bowral . . 


6 Mar., 1893 


11-94 


• 


13 Jan., 1911 


18-25 


Bowraville 


22 June, 1898 


11-50 Mount Pleasant . 


14 Jan., 1911 


K -40 


Broger'.s Creek 


14 Feb., 1898 


20-05 Myra. Vale 


14 Feb., 1898 


10-00 


„ 


19 July, 1910 


12-22 


Nambucca Heads 


3 Apr., 1905.. 


10-62 


Broger's Creek 


13 Jan., 1911 


20-83 


Nepean Tunnel . 


14 Feb., 1898 


12-30 


Upper 






Nethercote 


14 Jan., 1911 


11-32 


Bulli Mountain . . 


19 Mar., 1894 


10-45 


Newcastle 


19 Mar., 1871 


11-17 


» . . 


13 Feb., 1898 


17-14 


>» 


9 Mar., 1893 


11-14 


Burwood 


28 May, 1889 


11-75 


>; 


24 Feb., 1908 


10-02 


Camden . . 


11 July, 1904 


10-90 


NowTa 


11 July, 1904 


11-50 


Camden Haven . . 


22 Jan,. 1895 


12-23 


Nowra T.O. 


13 Jan., 1911 


13-00 


Canley Vale 


28 May, 1889 


10 -OG 


Padstow Park 


9 Mar., 1913 


10-64 


,, 


20 Mar., 1892 


10-85 


Parramatta 


28 May, 1889 


11-94 


Castle Hill 


28 May, 1889 


13-49 


,. 


20 Mar., 1892 


11-01 


Cockl" Creek 


23 Feb., 1908 


10-45 


Port Macqiiarie . 


9 Nov., 1887 


10-76 


Colombo Lyttleton 


5 Mar., 1893 


12-17 


Port Stephens 


9 Feb., 1889.. 


10-15 


Condong 


27 Mar., 1887 


18-66 Prospect" 


28 May, 1889 


12-37 


,, 


15 Jan., 1890 


11-50 


Raymond Terrace 


28 Sept., 1903 


10-32 


CookviUe 


1 Apr., 1892.. 


11-31 


Richmond 


28 May, 1889 


12-18 


Coramba 


11 June, 1893 


10-83 


Roberts >n 


14 Feb., 1898 


10-00 


Cordeaux River . . 


26 Feb., 1873 


10-98 


„ 


10 July, 1904 


10-50 


„ „ 


3 Feb., 1890.. 


11-51 


Robertson P.O. . . 


13 Jan., 1911 


10-28 


)! 9> 


14 Feb , 1898 


22-58 


Rooty Hill 


27 May, 1889 


11-85 


„ „ 


31 Aug., 1906 


10-31 


Rylstone 


28 May, 1889 


10-26 


„ „ 


13 Jan., 1911 


14-52 


Seven Oaks 


22 June, 1898 


11-06 


Cudgen 


15 Mar., 1894 


10-23 


South Head (near 


29 Apr., 1841 


20-12 


Dapto West 


14 Fe:.., 1898 


12-05 


Sydney) 






» • • 


13 Jan., 1911 


10-37 


j> „ 


16 Oct., 1844 


20-41 


Darkes' Forest . . 


8 Feb., 1895.. 


11-10 


Springwood 


7 Mar., 1894 


10-55 


Dunheved 


28 May, 1889 


12-40 


Stockyard Mount 


13 Jan., 1911 


11-54 


Eden . . 


4 May, 1875 


10-52 


Taree . . 


28 Feb., 1892 


12-24 


Fernmouut 


2 Feb., 1890.. 


10-36 


Terara . . 


26 Feb., 1873 


12-57 


,, 


2 June, 1903 


11-29 


Tomago . . 


9 Mar., 1893 


13-76 


Goorangoola 


9 Mar., 1893 


10-34 


Tongarra 


9 July, 1904.. 


11-10 


Guy Fawkes 


2 June, 1903 


11-30 


Tongarra Farm . . 


14 Feb., 1898 


15-12 


Helensburgh 


13 Jan., 1911 


12-20 


To warn ba 


5 Mar., 1893 


20-00 


Hercynia 


28 Mav, 1889 


11-85 


Tweed Heads 


14 Jan., 1890 


10-53 


Holy Flat 


12 Mar., 1887 


12-00 


» 


14 Mar. 1894 


11-40 


,, 


28 Feb , 1892 


12-24 


Trial Bay 


9 Mar., 1893 


11-13 


Jamberoo 


14 Feb., 1898 


10-92 


White Swamp 


12 Jan., 1911 


10-24 


>. 


13 Feb., 1911 


10-89 


W'jUongong 


26 Feb., 1873 


11-00 


Kareela 


20 Oct., 1902 


11-73 


» 


5 Apr., 1882.. 


10-00 


Katoomba 


7 Apr., 1913.. 


10-50 


Woolgoolga 


11 June, 1893 


10-83 


Kembla Heights . . 


13 Jan., 1911 


17-46 


Yellow Rock 


14 Feb., 1898 


11-69 


Kempsey \_ ^.^ . . 


10 Mar., 1893 


in -34 ! 









6" 50 inches fell in 2 hours. 



Climate of Australia. 



143 







(M CO 


,_i 


I> CO CO lO O O <N 


,—1 


r^ 


CD 


>c 


lO 


o 


X X O O 05 


•jeai 


to 


c- 


C5 


"-i 


M Ol o 


:o 


lO Ir- 


c^ 


o »o 


■— 1 


CO « O 


T- 1 


1> 


as 


■—1 


X 




^^ 


(^^ 


^ 


,-s 


o 


_ 


o 


^^ 


X 


05 


o 


CO 


X 


OJ 


CO X 


1- 


~« 


:c 


„ 


l^ 






•^ 




CO 






■>A 




Ol 


-M 


— ' 


i?4 (N <M (M -* rf 


Tf 


CO 


-f 


Tf 


'-2 






,-:> 


o 


Tt< 


vT. 


■N 


Tt- 


— 


— 


IM 


C: 


o 


CO 


-* 


cc 


Q 


^ 


CO 


Tf 


Ol 


Tf 


^ 






cc 


L-: 


<:; 


ir? 


CO 


C-. 


1- 


r~ 


X 




CO o; 




o o 


CO <N 


X 


t—i 


O I- 












• 


• 














• 


















• 






O fO o o 


'"' 


oo 


^^ 


"^ 


'"' 


<N 


'"' 


(MtNOqC^COMO't 


la 






,_ 


ro 


•J 


c- 


-^ 


CO 


— 


O) 


•O 


X 


— 


o 


_ 


— 


o 


^ 


r^ 


Ol 


^ 


t^ Ol 


■iaquiaAOX 


5 


'iA 




l^ 


■^ 


C2 


T' 


f- 


";• 


rN 


r 


C-J 


t^; 


X (M 


r 


c; 


X 


Tf 


^ 


" 


IM 






o 


^ 


o o 


^ 


-^ 


^ 


— ' 


•M 


— 


-M 


OJ 


— 


oa o^ (N 


Ol (M 


CO 


OJ 


^ 






(N 


r- 


._ 


^ 


OJ 


'■T 


_t 


-+ 


._ 


-t 


-+ 


^ 


„ 


X 


r^ 


0<1 


X 


r^ 


X. 


Ol 


— 


•jaqopo 


2 




■r 


o 


l^ 


L~ 


t^ 


X 




I- 


X 




Ol 


r 


Ol 


c- 


X 


c; 


Ol 


c- 


t^ 


Ol 




— 


■M 


— 


Ol 


— 


— 


— ' 


— 


Ol 


Ol 


— 


Ol 


01 


Ol 


04 


oq O] 


OJ 


0^1 


Ol 


— 


— 






X 


-r 


r- 


1- 


_ 


-t 


^ 


1- 


-t 


— 


»C 


'^ 


r^ 


— 


t- 


m 


^ 


.^ 


1.0 


X 


— 


•jaquiajdas 


'J. 


-T 


r- 


CO 


"r 


-r 




r 


r 




X 


V 




r- 


X 


t^ 


X 


Ol 


T 


^ 


CO 


7^ 






O 


^ 


CO 


— 


=^ 


— 


== 


Ol 


Ol 


— 


Ol 


Ol 


Ol 


^ 


o^ 


Ol 


CO 


Ol 


Ol 


— 


— 






_^ 


^ 


»* 


— 


— ^ 


_ 


x 


_ 


•^ 


o 


_ 


-^ 


r^ 


-^ 


r^ 


— 


Ol 


Ol 


10 


_ 


Ol 


•jsrUjny 


'/. 


~ 




":" 


f 


T 


LO 


C2 


-N 


X 




X 


X 


l- 


c 


r- 


Ol 


Tf 


Tf 


CO 


r 


T' 




— 


- 


~ 


lO 


- 


=' 


Ol 


= 


S^l 


OJ 


— 


— 


— 


01 


— 


Ol 


CO 


CO 


Ol 


oq 


-^ 


o 






t^ 


r- 


Tf 0-1 


■o 


;^ 


lO 


rt 


c; 


C5 


— 


o 


_ 





;- 


X 


Tf 


l~ 


CO CO o 


•xpir 


■jj 


O tN 


"? "? 


"? 


■-o 


•r 


9 


t^; 


-^ 


X 




r^ 


CO 


Ol 




Tf O CO O CO 




'-' 


o 


o 


- 


^ 


==^ 


0-1 


O C^) -N 


— 


-^ 


"M 


Ol 


—■ 


CO 


Tf 


Tf Oq Ol 


-' 


o 






-,o 


rj 


_ 


cc 


1^ 


Si <M 


~r 


— 


CO 


_ 


Ol 


1* 


^ 


!-r5 


X 


r^ 


Ol 


Ol 


CO 


t^ 


•aanf 


-r. 




-N 


»^ 




LO 


T" 


;' 


l- 


7" 




7" 


Ol 


-t- 




1^ 




T' 


IC 






Tf 




— 


— 


— 


- 


— 


— 


CO 


— 


■M 


CO 


O) 


Ol 


Ol 


CO 


— 


-t 


1^ 


Tf 


Ol 


Ol 


Ol 


^ 






lO 


_ 


» 


^ 


O c- 


_ 


•M 


Ol 


— 


t.O 


_^ 


^ 


— 


— 


10 


~. 


o 


Ol 


•^ 


LO 


•A Bit 


K 


i^ 


->■ 


X 


■n- 




l^ 


zi 






~- 


7^ 


~" 


o 


T 


X 


Ci 


X 


-r 




r 


~ 




— 


— 


o 


•+ 


— 


— 


Oi 


^ 


'N 


S^l 


— 


Ol 


— 


Ol 


-^ 


CO 


Tf 


Tf 


Ol 


Ol 


— 


— 






o o 


>-0 


-; 


3 


X 


LO 


r^ 


■-S 


-N-, 


Ol 


— 


r^ 


CO 


Ol 


Tf oq oq 


Tf 


-f 


_ 


ludr 


■r. 


o 


ro 


r 


r 


c; 


X 


T 


o 


-* 


X 


CO 


X 


o 


r 


Ci 


Ol Tf I> 




Tf 


o 




— ' 


-* 


-^ 


-^ 


o 


o 


— 


^ 


— 


Ol 


— 


Ol 


— 


O] 


-^ 


Tf 


in 


■* 


Ol 


CO 


Ol 


X 






o 


t^ 


rt 


oq 


Tj« t- 


■^ 


»o 


„ 


CO 


X 


o 


o 


r^ 


Tf 


t^ 


.- 


Tf 


O CO 


— 






I-- 


r- 


C- 00 


O^ 


o 


■-S 


»a o o 


1—1 


^ 


X 


Ci 


^H 


O Tf Ci (N 


Tf 


CO 


•qojBK 


c 


• 




" 










• 




• 










• 
















t— 1 




~ 


"^ 


'"' 


o 


^^ 




^^ 




"^ 


'"' 


^^ 


Tf 


o lo CO CO lo 


Tf 






IC 


LO 


^ 


_ 


CO 


— 


_, 


^ 


-t 


-* 


"+ 


lO 


O X 


Tf O 


— 


Tf 


c^ 


CO 


o 


•^junjqaj 


X 


O ro CO 


^ 


l^ 


•-0 


X O CO IM t^ ■* 




t^ 05 O 


CC 




cc 


CO 


Ol 


-^ 


fC 


o o o 


— ' 


o o 


'-' 


-• 


-^ 


^ 


^ 


— 


-* 


Tf Tf 


Tf CO 


- 


X 


I- 






r- 


•-S 


-^ 


CO 


X -* C5 


I- 


O ^ lO o 


.« 


•-0 ■* i> o CO 


,- 


,- 


1-0 






*^ 






CO 




I^ 


1- 


CO 


r- 


COXOOOJ-^OCOOtN 




C^l 




■Aivnuv£ 




" 




• 


• 










- 




• 


• 


• 










• 


> 








— < 






'^ 


^ 


'^ 


o o 


•"^ 


■"^ 


"^ 


^^ 


'"' 


^ 


<M Tf CO CO CO 


— 


a-. 


X 


= 02 

■iSs 


s 






0^1 


r^ 














CO 




o; 






1.0 




X 




X 




• M 






— 




I- 




0-J 


t- 


Tf 








CO 


r* 










^- 






a""'-' 


«^ 










o 




<M 






























^ 




1- 


-t 


t— 




^ 


o 






OOOOCOOCOOIMC: 


1^ 


r- 


t^ 


tt 


c^ 


35 


M 


C- 


w 


<N 


-f O M CO Ci 


r— « 


■o 


CO 


f— 1 


CO Tf 


1— t 


^ 


















■>! c; 




o cc 


"* 










m 
















- 


.E^ 








--^ 


-^ 






































^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 




, 














® 




^ 




— 


■^ 


1^ 


>'i 


— 


1- 


0^1 


^^ 


C5 


Ol 


o 


lO cc 


01 


(t: 


1^ 


Ol o 


Ol 






'-. 


— ' 




c; 


'.": 


c; 




— 


';; 


Ol 




Ol 






IC 




-t 


CO 




CO 




«^ 


W 


o 





o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


n 






Q 


^ 


^ 








^ 


fy 


^ 


Q 


it 


O IM 


'-► 


^H 


c^ 


X 


*—t 


-f 


CO 


-t 


-+ 


1^ 


l^ 


en 








^M 


-"^ 


-^ 




S 




CO 


■M 


-^ 


C-J 


CO 


CO 


-+ 


-t- 


-* -+ ^ 


t 


-* Tf 


10 


10 


1.0 


ir- 


lO. 


l'^ 


-f 


^ 




^ 






"" 








"" 


"" 


" 


^^ 


"^ 




'~' 


'"' 


^^ 


'~~' 


"^ 


■^ 


^ 








^ 


^ 


V 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


, 


, 


, 






















V 






1- 


1 - 


1-. 




^ 


X 


» 


c^ 


^ 


* 


CO 


1^ 


o 


1^ 


Ol 


1"* 


»■* 


X 


-f 




" 




• < 


'--' 


1.-5 


-t 


'.".' 


';. 


»tw 


-t 


?c 


— 


'-0 


•-0 


Ol 


Ol 


Ol 


»c 


1-0 


-t 


Ol 


Ol 




^ 


• 


o 


o 


o 





o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 






^ 






^ 


rt 


^ 




Q 


~ 








— 






^ 


-o 


I-" 


GO 


t- Ol 




in 


Tf CO (M (M 


1^ 


If 


— ■ 


s 












■MCOCOCOCOCOCO-t 


-t CO CO CO 




CO (M 


Ol 














1 














































tfl 


















































































>. 
































O 












^ 


i: 
































tf 










^ 








s 

Q 


a 




S x 

o . 


■c 


X 





1 




0/ 

1 




5 

75 

u 




O 

1 




o 
r, 

!4 


-a 




o 

Q. 

£ 






U 


2 




tf 


Q 


"3 


o 


"2 


7" 




^ 
"o 


o 




^ 


S 






'^ 


"r 


CJ 

n 








OiMSL, 




-< -ti 23 ca 




o 




W joK 


!/} 


>^ 


;?! 


c: 


■•y 






^ & 



■TT? -t^ -t^ 



r— «^ 0^ 






o 
tx 


c 

cS 


ce 








_^ 




O) 




<D 


_ ~ 


c 


rS 


-i-j 





r^ 


P 


c 




, ^ 


m 


O; 




.^ 


fH 














'' 


«u 


o 




<u 


-t^ 


p. 




+J 








ci 


T-l 


O 


es 


rr 


C 


Ci 










f' 






o 


u 
*•> 


rn" 


-fj 


CO 




OJ 


^ 


3 


H-l 


n3 


00 


-«»' 


o 


3 








-j-j 




C 
u 


o 


ri 




i) 






o 


t« 


;-i 


fi 


^ 


11 


P- 






"^ 






c 










o 


t: 


^ 




->^ 


o 






m 


cc 


rr! 




<v 








^ 


o 


TO 




•+i 


^3 


to" 












o 


*" 


O/ 






& 


q^ 




o 




^^w 




^ 




^ 




-^ 




O 








hO 














-t- 






> 


t» 


i=l 




o 


^ 






3 
o 
o 
O 


0! 


o3 




_ 




-M 



i:l^ 



> 2 "S 



<u 


-tj 


ro 


^ 








Tl 


<u 


0; 




rS 


^ 


CS 


■M 


H 




»4-l 




C 


o 




n 






(V 


^ 




o 


m 




O 





144 



Federal Handbook. 



agricultural areas, falling during the growing period, April to October. From 
the coast for about 80 to 100 inland miles the rainfall decreases rather 
rapidly, but the area in the south-west over which 15 or more inches fall 
amounts to 74,206 square miles. 

The rapid decrease from the west coast inland is partly accounted for 
by the range of hills which runs parallel to the coast from the extreme south 
to beyond the Murchison River, although they are not of sufficient elevation 
to serve as a natural store for precipitation in the form of snow. At some 
places on the southern portions of these hills, the annual rainfall exceeds 42 
inches, about 10 more than on the coast. Inland, owing to the vast extent 
of land between the gold-fields and the South Australian boundary, over 
which the easterly winds pass, the evaporation is very great, amounting 
to about 87 inches annually at Coolgardie, while on the coast, at Perth, it is 
66 inches. 

The full effects of the westerly winds of southern latitudes are apparently 
not felt beyond lat. 27 degrees, just reached by the 15-in. isohyet, and from 
there to the tropic the rainfall is scanty and occasionally amounts to only 
3 or 4 inches in the year. 

From that isohyetal inland, towards the Murchison and North Coolgardie 
gold-fields, the records only extend back some ten or fifteen years, but it 
is not likely that longer records will show a much larger annual rainfall. 
The 10-in. isohyet which skirts Peak Hill and Wiluna is probably doubtful, 
and may ultimately have to be modified, as the record used in obtaining the 
average rainfall at these two stations was very largely inflated by the abnormal 
falls in March and April, 1900, and January and February, 1902, when Peak 
Hill registered 18*13 and 14*56 respectively, and Wiluna 22*82 and 9*69 
inches. 

North of the Tropic, the Kimberley district receives good tropical rains 
during the summer months, from November to March or April, but the 
De Grey and Fortescue districts are dependent for their rainfall partly on 
the tropical storms, commencing about December, and partly on the winter 
rains from the Indian Ocean, but the total amounts are smaller than those 
in the Kimberley district, and very variable, as sometimes both the tropical 
and southern winter rains fail, and at other times phenomenal falls occur 
during the " willy willy " season, e.g., Whim Creek registered 36*53 inches 
on three days in April in 1898. 

The areas in Western Australia receiving varying quantities of rainfall, 
as shown on the map, are as follows :— 



Over 40 inches . . 
From 30 to 40 inches 

„ 25 „ 30 .. 

„ 20 „ 2.5 .. 

„ 15 „ 20 „ 

„ 10 „ 15 „ 
Under 10 inches 



Total 



Area ia Square 5Iiles. 



Rest of 
Tropical, North| Western The Whole 

of Tropic. Australia, Soutli State. 

I of Tropic. 



28,940 
36,973 
36,693 
52,640 
153,870 



309,116 



3,376 
11,810 

7,127 
14,611 
37,282 
78,945 



153,151 



513,653 
513,653 



Climate op Australia. 



145 



South Australia. 

The main factors which determine the rainfall distribution of South 
Australia are the proximity of the Southern Ocean and the long extent of 
coast line exposed to the free and unrestricted sweep of the westerly winds 
nautically known as the roaring forties ; the rainfall over all the coastal 
areas is essentially a winter one, and practically all available for agricultural 
purposes, as from 70 to 90 per cent, of the annual totals in the more settled 
areas, falls during the growing period, April to October. 

Though physiographic influence is less apparent than in south-eastern 
Australia, the effect of elevation is marked by the heavier rainfalls on the 
eastern sides of Spencer's Gulf and Gulf St. Vincent, and by the northerly 
extension of the 10-in. isohyetal from Port Augusta to beyond Blinman. 
The abundant rain on the Mount Lofty ranges to the east of Adelaide are a 
conspicuous example of this, the annual total on the crest of the range reaching 
to nearly 47 inches. 

A rapid decrease of the rainfall takes place from the agricultural areas 
northwards to the interior, where, in the Lake Eyre basin, which is below sea- 
level, the average annual fall — largely made up of capricious summer storms — 
is under 5 inches, this district being probably the driest part of the 
continent. 

In the Northern Territory the chief factor in the distribution of the rain- 
fall, which is almost entirely confined to the six summer months, is latitude 
or distance from the north coast — the rains being abundant on the coast, 
but rapidly decreasing towards the interior. 

The areas in South Australia and the Territory enjoying varying quantities 
of rainfall, as shown on the map, are as follow : — 











Area in Square Miles. 


Rainfall. 


1 
South Australia. Nortliein Territory. 


Over 40 inches . . 

From 30 to 40 inches 
„ 25 „ 30 „ 
„ 20 „ 25 „ 
„ 15 „ 20 „ 
.. 10 „ 15 „ 

Under 10 inches 








64 

984 

3,197 

10,630 

14,190 

33,405 

317,600 


46,780 
40,690 
47,580 
45,890 
62,920 
141,570 
138,190 


7 


otal 






380,070 


523,620 



Queensland. 

The eastern littoral of Queensland from Cape York to the Tweed receives 
an annual average rainfall of about 60 inches. On parts of the north coast, 
between Cooktown and Townsville, this increases to L50 and 16.5 inches per 
annum. The main source of supply is the south-cast trade wind, and local 
variations in totals are solely due to differences in elevations of the shore 
line. 

On the Peninsula the rainfall ranges from 69 inches at Cape York to 32 
inches at Georgetown ; in lower Carpentaria, it averages about 25 inchest 



146 



Federal Handbook. 



In the central districts the average varies from 30 inches on the eastern 
boundary to 20 inches on the western. 

In the Maranoa it averages about 23 inches, and over the Darling Downs 
from 25 to 30 inches. In the Warrego, it varies from 1.5 to 20 inches, and in 
the far western districts from 15 inches down to 6 inches at Birdsville, in the 
extreme south-west corner. 

During the wettest months of the year, viz., January, February, and 
March, very heavy daily falls over the eastern areas are not by any means 
infrequent. A fall of 10 inches and over in the 24 hours has been recorded 
on many occasions. On 2nd February, 1893, 35 '71 inches were measured 
at Crohamhurst ; this constitutes one of the world's records for heavy 
rainfall. On that occasion the total measurement for the four days ending 3rd 
February was 77*305 inches, or nearly 6 J feet. 

The following table shows the areas in square miles of varying quantities 
of rainfall : — 



RainfaU 


Area Id 
Square Allies. 


Over 80 inches 




2,826 


From 70 to 80 inches 






2,379 


„ 60 „ 70 








10,261 


„ 50 „ 60 








18,167 


„ 40 „ 50 








60,466 


„ 30 „ 40 








80,556 


„ 25 „ 30 








100,137 


„ 20 „ 25 








118,391 


„ 15 „ 20 








116,790 


„ 10 „ 15 








97,722 


Under 10 inches 








62,805 


Total 






670,500 



New South Wales. 

Proximity to the ocean, with prevailing winds of favorable direction, 
is, in all countries, the chief factor accounting for the greatest totals being 
generally recorded along the coast line. New South Wales shows no excep- 
tion to this law, but it is noticeable that nearly all the districts near the 
coastal rivers show a depressed rainfall in comparison with surrounding and 
naturally higher country. 

Starting from the northern border, the 50-in. isohyetal line at Casino, 
on the Richmond River, deviates slightly towards the sea line ; and the same 
feature may be noted, in a more or less marked degree, on the Clarence, 
Macleay, Manning, Hunter, and Shoalhaven Rivers ; while the Nepean 
Valley can be traced right through from Picton to the Hawkesbury by its 
relatively light rainfall. 

On the northern tablelands the higher levels enjoy falls well over 30 inches. 
The extension of that isohyet encloses a narrow tongue-shaped area, reaching 
in a south-westerly direction from Inverell to Lindsay, owing to the 
elevation of this area being higher than that of the country on its west and 
south boundaries. 

The series of short ranges, reaching from Murrurundi to the Warrum- 
bungle, can be readily followed by the relatively higher rainfall figures. 



Climate op Australia. 



U7 



Further south, the Blue Mountains are particularly conspicuous, 
also the Canobolas. The extension of the Australian Alps, which almost 
entirely feed the Murrumbidgee, and contribute largely to the constant flow 
of the Murray, stands out in clear relief. Although a considerable distance 
from the coast, the elevation is such as to modify the disadvantage resulting 
therefrom ; and not only is abundant moisture extracted from the winds 
from oS the east coast, but considerable condensation takes place on the 
western aspect from the south-west winter winds after they have swept 
across nearly the whole length and breadth of Victoria. 

The comparatively light rainfall in the district extending from Delegate 
to Yass, and conspicuously so between Bobundra and Michelago, is one 
of the most remarkable features of the rainfall map of Australia. 
Although the greater part of this district is considerably over 2,000 feet high, 
it is enclosed by ranges of mountains rising to 3,000 and 5,000 feet, which 
condense from all directions moisture that would otherwise benefit it. 

It may be added that, although the falls over this area do not exceed 25 
inches, yet it is remarkably productive, for the reason that evaporation is 
relatively small, and that a vast quantity of soakage must find its way there 
from the encompassing ranges. 

The Sydney and Burrinjuck water supply catchment areas receive 
annual totals ranging from 30 to 60, and from 20 to 60 inches respectively. 

The areas in New South Wales, enjoying varying quantities of rainfall, 
are shown in the following table : — 



Rainfall. 



Over 70 inches 
From 60 to 70 inches 



„ 50 


„ 60 


„ 40 


„ 50 


„ 30 


„ 40 


„ 20 


„ 30 


„ 15 


„ 20 


„ 10 


„ 15 


Under 10 


inches 



Area in 
Square MUee. 



668 
1,765 
4,329 
15,804 
30,700 
77,202 
57,639 
77,268 
44,997 



Total 



310,372 



Victoria. 

A casual glance at the rainfall map of V' ictoria will again indicate the great 
control exercised in rainfall distribution over the earth's surface by the 
mountains and proximity to the seashore. In regard to the latter factor, 
it will be noticed that the isohyets generally follow the contour of the coast 
line, and in the former the heaviest records are coincident with the highest 
mountains of the State. 

The abundant rains on the Australian Alps, the Cape Otway ranges, 
and the Gippsland ranges are particularly conspicuous. In a less striking 
manner is sliown the precipitating effect of the Central Dividing Range and the 
Grampians. The relatively depressed areas to the north and west of Mel- 
bourne suffer in regaid to the comparative smallness of their rainfall through 
the effect of the higher surrounding country on rain-bearing winds. A 
similar effect is noticeable in the Latrobe, Thomson, Tambo, and Mitta 
Mitta Valleys. 



148 



Federal Handbook. 



While contending that the rainfall over the eastern portion of Australia 
is in no wise short of that experienced in other contnients, we must not lose 
sight of the fact that our mountain chains are not sufficiently high, nor have 
they the extent of area, to compensate for Australia's deficiency of rainfall 
in the areas far removed from the coast, i.e., they are not of sufficient eleva- 
tion to serve as a natural store for precipitation in the form of snow, and also 
that the loss of moisture by evaporation is abnormal. It is, therefore, 
imperative, if equalizing results are to be obtained from the capriciousness of 
our rainfall seasons, that artificial storage in reservoirs at the catchments 
be resorted to, and all rivers, particularly those inland, dammed and 
locked as a national policy of paramount importance, and, further, that the 
waters in rivers, lakes, and reservoirs, be protected from desiccating winds by 
the liberal planting of trees. 

In studying the distribution of rainfall, as depicted on the map, we find 
that the areas in Victoria enjo\dng varying quantities of rainfall per annum 
are as follow : — 



Area in 
Square Miles. 



Over 60 inches 
From 50 to 60 inches 
„ 40 „ 50 „ 



30 
25 
20 
15 



40 
30 
25 
20 



Under 15 inches 



Total 



1,597 
3,348 
7,055 
14,029 
15,247 
14,070 
12,626 
19,912 



87,884 



Tasmania. 

In the West Coastal district and the north-east, the rainfall varies so 
very much that until records are available for a long series of years, the 
isohyets are bound to be considerably altered at the end of each year. 

The extremes and means are shown in the following table, viz. : — 



North-east district, Sprmgfield 
Western district — 

Waratah 

Mount Read 



Highest. 



Inches. 
86-84 

117-24 
145-04 



Inches. 
36-81 



.59-97 
70-38 



Mean. 



Inches. 
57-68 



85-52 
110-45 



The most striking feature in these parts of the island is the great variation 
shown for such a comparatively small area between the greatest and least 
average falls, viz., from 17 '93 inches at Beaufront (Ross), to 115*82 at Mount 
Lyell on the AVest Coast, showing a range of 97*89 inches. This accentuates 
the great control exercised upon the rainfall by the physiographic conditions 
and proximity to the seashore. 

The West Coast, being exposed to the full sweep of the moisture-laden 
westerly winds, and condensation being assisted by altitudes of between 



Climate of Australia. 



149 



3,000 and 5,000 feet, experiences frequent rains, and, as may be seen by a 
glance at the map, high annual averages, over lOU inches in phices, are the 
result. 

The effect of altitude is again noticeable in the south-east, where Hobart, 
at an elevation of 160 feet, has an annual rainfall of 23*57 inches, while 
Mount Wellington, at the 2,.500-ft. level, totals 60-34: inches. 

The heavy rains experienced in the north-east are similar in character to 
those on the coast of New South Wales and eastern Victoria, and the south- 
east winds exercise a certain amount of control over the rainfall of this portion 
of the island. 

The areas in Tasmania enjoying varying quantities of rainfall, as shown 
on the map, are as follow : — 



Rainfall. 


Area in 
Square Miles. 


Over 100 inches . . 

From -80 to 100 inches 
„ 60 „ 80 „ 
„ 50 „ 60 „ 
., 40 „ 50 „ 
„ 30 „ 40 „ 

„ 20 „ 30 „ 

Under 20 inches . . 


' Mainland . 
King, Flin 
[ other Isla 


ders, 
nds 


and 


553 
1,235 
2,097 
2,767 
3,449 
4,588 
6,035 

1,524 
937 


Total .. 


ainland 
h-west Group 


23,185 


No records available — 
In i-outh-west of i: 
On Islands of Nori 


2,927 
103 


Grand Total 


Area 




26,215 



Bruni Island has been included with the Mainland. 

8. Rainfall During the Wheat=growing Period. 

In Australia wheat-growing under ordinary conditions is generally con- 
sidered a safe and payable proposition when 10 inches of rain and over falls 
from the month of April to that of October inclusive. 

The accompanying map (Fig. 9) has been compiled for the purpose of showing 
what portions of the continent are favoured with the above requirements. 

There are in all 484,330 square miles of country with 10 inches of rainfall 
and over during the wheat-growing period, distributed as follows : — 93,500 
square miles in Western Australia, 46,980 square miles in South Australia, 
79,247 square miles in Queensland, 163,772 square miles in New 
South Wales, 74,616 square miles in Victoria, and 26,215 square miles in 
Tasmania. 

Much of these areas, however, is unsuitable, probably half the total, 
by reason of excessive rains, early summer rain, topography and soil, but 
as compensation there are vast tracts of interior land possible for f (sreal 
growth by the adoption of drought resisting seed and dry farming methods, 
which, in all probability, may still give the estimated 500,000 s(jUiiro miles 
or even more for wheat cultivation. 



150 Federal Handbook. 



During the year 1912-13 there were only 11,247 square miles, less than 
half the area of Tasmania, under wheat, yielding 88,554,738 bushels. This 
is approximately only one-third of the area at present used for this purpose, 
allowing for land under fallow and rotation of crops. Estimating, therefore, 
that only a third of the 500,000 would be available each year for wheat 
cultivation, the possible output from Australia could reach 900 to 1,000 
million bushels. 

From the trend of developments during the last few years it would appear 
that the greatest scope for expansion in wheat production is in New South 
Wales and Western Australia. 

The boundary of the 10-in. wheat period isohyet starts on the west coast 
of Western Australia, a few miles to the south of Hamelin Pool, thence passes 
inland in a south-easterly direction towards Southern Cross, from there 
almost due east, entering the Great Bight to the north of Israelite Bay. It 
again enters the mainland between Fowler's Bay and Streaky Bay, in South 
Australia, curving south-eastwards from Yardea to Spencer's Gulf to the 
north of Cowell, and crossing the Gulf it strikes the Peninsula near Port 
Pirie, forming a loop over the country well to the north of Port Augusta, 
whence it takes a sinuous course southwards through the lower Mallee to the 
north-east Wimmera, crossing the Murray in a north-easterly direction to the 
west of Deniliquin in Eiverina, then over the Murrumbidgee at Darlington 
Point, from there bending northwards and passing successively near Mount 
Hope, Nymagee, Coonamble, Walgett, to Munigindi, whence it extends 
almost in a direct line northwards, finally leaving the Queensland coast at 
Bowen. 

It will be noticed how remarkably closely the 10-in. and Goyder's line 
follow one another in South Australia. 

In New South Wales, however, there are considerable deviations 
between Coghlan's and the 10-in. wheat lines. 

Goyder's line was determined in 1865 by Mr. G. W. Goyder, the Surveyor- 
General of the then colony, based upon the estimated average rainfall and 
native flora. 

Coghlan's line was determined by Mr. T. Coghlan, State Statistician, in 
1903, based upon rainfall data and the actual experience of growers. 

The percentage lines of the wheat-growing period in relation to the annual 
average rainfall are of considerable interest, and emphasize the alternating 
distinct wet and dry season in Australia already referred to. 

Roughly speaking, from 60 to 70 per cent, of the annual total precipitation 
falls over southern Australia during the seven coldest months, and from 30 
to 40 per cent, during the hottest months. North of the tropic the quan- 
titative distribution is reversed, only 10 to 40 per cent, falling during the 
cold months and from 60 to 90 per cent, during the hot months. 

In the south-western portion of Western Australia, it will be observed 
that 90 per cent, of the annual average rainfall is precipitated in the winter 
and 10 per cent, only during the summer months. 

On the south-eastern shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria we have the other 
extreme — only 5 per cent, of the year's rainfall total falls within the seven 
cold months mentioned, and 95 per cent, during the remaining five. 



Climate of Australia. 



151 




i^^ 



-n 



!j A'- V 



IHL 



J si 



-4« 






in = 



,- 4> - S ^ ■ 



^ 



152 



Federal Handbook. 



Graph showing Kean Konthly Evaporation at Selected 

Stations. 




Note. — Each vertical space represents 1 itjch or 25 '4 millimetres. 
Fig. 12. 



Climate of Australia. 153 



9. Snow. 

Perennial snow occurs only over the sheltered crevices in the liighest 
portions of the Australian Alps, where, however, during the winter months 
it accumulates to a depth of many feet, and by gradual thawing maintains 
a constant flow of water to the Murray and Snowy Rivers throughout the 
year. 

During the winter period snow can always be expected along the mountain 
ranges in New South Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania, and occasionally on 
the Mount Lofty ranges, in South Australia. On rare occasions also it has 
reached as far north as Toowoomba, in Queensland, latitude 27° 28' S. 

Over the plain country it has been known to fall as far west as Louth, 
on the Darling River, over the whole of eastern and southern Victoria, except 
the immediate coast line. In South Australia it has been recorded over a 
belt of country lying to the east of Spencer's Gulf, about 200 miles long, 
running from north to south and 75 miles wide. It has only been noted at 
one place to the west of the Gulf, viz., at Yardea, near Lake Gardner. 

In Western Australia it has been 
recorded on the hills in the extreme 
south-west, and at a few places on the 
southern gold-fields. 

The heaviest snowstorm on record 
in New South Wales occurred between 
3rd and 7th July, 1900, extending from 
Congewar in the Hunter district to 
Condobolin and Warrumbungle, in the 



Australia 




west. Railway traffic became para- nakhtd portion iho» 

- , 1 • 1 J • 'fiherr ^novi fios fallen. 

lyzed, passengers bemg shut up m 

carriages and unable to reach hotels. In ^* 

places the snow was 8 feet deep on the rails. At Bathurst, many roofs, 

verandahs, etc., collapsed under its weight, while telegraph lines were levelled 

everywhere. 

In 1901, on 28th July, the most widespread snowstorm occurred over 
south-eastern Australia, being practically general east of the 145th meridian. 
Another remarkable storm on the 29th and 30th August, 1905, extended 
from South Australia through southern Victoria along the highlands of 
New South Wales to within 30 miles of the Queensland border. 

On the mainland Sydney and Melbourne are the only two capital cities 
that possess authenticated records of appreciable snow falls. In Sydney on 
June .30th. 1836, snow fell for half-an-hour, sufficient being on the ground 
to enable boys to make snowballs. 

Melbourne was covered with snow 7 to 12 inches deep on the morning of 
the 3l3t August, 1849. Another remarkable fall took place on the 7th 
August, 1899, between 1 and 2 p ra , when snow fell heavily in the Fitzroy 
Gardens, and snowballing was indulged in at the Scotch College. A light to 
heavy fall also occurred over the north-eastern suburbs of Melbourne between 
7 and 8 a.m. on the 25th September, 1905. Flakes of snow were observed 
in, or close to, Melbourne on 14th July, 1810, 27th Juno. 1845, 26th July. 
1882, 28th June, 1900, 18th April, 1910, and 21st June, 1911. 



154 



Federal Handbook. 



10. Evaporation. 

The problems which inevitably face the engineering work of water conser- 
vation for the development and expansion of Australia's as yet unused 
territory demand that the fullest knowledge possible respecting the rate 
and distribution of evaporation (a climatic element second in importance 
to rainfall only) should be available. 

For the purpose of obtaining data on this subject a number of iron jacketed 
tanks 3 feet in diameter have been distributed to several selected centres. 

The tops of the tanks are sunk to within an inch of the surface level of 
the ground. They contain about 130 gallons of water, which is replenished 
when or before a fall of 6 inches from the top of the tank takes place, in 
order that the exposed level may be fairly constant and also that the added 
water may not materially affect the temperature of the main body. 

Information collected up to the present is not very extensive, nor do the 
observations in some cases extend over many years, but sufficient has been 
obtained to approximate roughly the times of equal evaporation and the 
aggregate annual amounts in different parts of the continent. 

The results deduced from observations carried out at the capital cities 
over a great number of years establish the rate and total evaporation taking 
place over coastal regions south of the tropic. At coastal stations north of 
the tropic, viz., Rockhampton, Cooktown, Thursday Island, Port Darwin, 
the annual totals have been computed with Fitgzerald's formula : — 



E 



[•014 (V - v) + -0012 (V - v)2] [1 + -GTw^]. 



Australia 



Marble Bar, Alice Springs, Boulia, and Broken Hill furnish results for 
the interior. Those at Broken Hill were undertaken at the Stephen's Creek 
Reservoir by Mr. Whitehead, the engineer of the silver city, and give the 
actual loss of water from the extensive artificial lake. It is satisfactory to 
note that the record from the standard taiik at the Umberumberka site 
but a few miles away gives only a difference of 3 • 399 inches for the twelve 
months. 

It will be seen by reference to the 
accompanying table and chart that 
about a third of the continent, almost 
coincident with that portion having 
but an average annual rainfall of 10 
inches and under, loses from exposed 
water 100 inches and over per annum. 

The daily rate of evaporation during 
the summer months is considerable, 
more especially inland, where from \ to 
f of an inch daily is a common occur- 
rence, and at times up to an inch and 
over, hence, if it is desired to receive any benefit from showers, any possible 
means that can be adopted to break the surface soil, and so let the rain 
through, must be resorted to, even on grazing land. 




Evaporation Map 
showiiy amount of emporoHon 
and Isahnics. 

Fig. 11. 



Climate of Australia. 



155 





•JBaA 


* * 

00 coMi>oocc(Mooaoo!0 05 

•C0r0-*0— lC0t-iC0G0C^O5-*^lO 


< — 1— 




r-iix>c»a5<Mioo500McOTiHrocci»co>ot^ 




■laquiaoaa 


M (MOliCOlGOO^iOl^OOOi 
-lOOO^iMOrOOI>t^OOOO-*(NO • 






*~'Tt*G5JO(MOOO^OiO-*iOO»OI:^ 


w 

o 
o 


•jaqraaAO^ 


toMfMOM-^COSlOOC^OOOfM • ■ • 


■jaqo^oQ 


M OOlOC<It»^CO'*^COO<35 
aTOt'OJiOCOCOfNQOt^O'M-*— ICO • 




~''-Hiai>O5^'*a0l^C0(NC0C0CO-* 


•wqtaQidag 


• O O -H (N ^ Tt< fO Tt< CO 05 O O 
2lOOo:)05rt(N<N®>OCOiOt^CDO • 
CcOfOfOtNMOOt^COIMC-O-^'COi • 






00rOlOI:^C»(MCClC(N-^(M(M<NCO 




•jsngny 


.CO OOOO-HOOCOOOOOO 

2 rt lo ir: CO i^ -^ o; 00 t^ 00 -11 t-~ -H t^ • 

G-^c0>-'5'-^»00C0-^-*S<lC5Ot~-l' • 
tC <M CO "O '^ — 1 CO. -t — 1 -H O — ' -< C^ 


«2 


sntif 


.CO CI O C5 t^ 03 O CO lO O CO 'n 
SoOCOOOlO-HXOOCO-tOOO^OJ^tM • 
C CO » ■* O -+1 C<) "-0 1^ O t-~ C. -^ rt< 't • 




U 


Tj<— I5<1COI-0 — 'N'M-hOO— lrt(M 


H 


<N — 1 O -t O '-0 O -f O O O <M 

. X o: 00 C5 O C^ :0 <M O -^ lO --C' cc Oi 


O 


1— iTj*-Heqco>o^<NcO'^oo^'-H(N 


•.iBH 


<N oot^oio«co-H-Ho:a3(M 
. (M Lt X o 1- » t- cq :c ^ :o t^ 5<i ir; 

■£ 05 :C 1^ CK 00 05 1^ O -)■ iM O O -O CI • ■ ■ 


< 
O 


n-ifiv 


t^ COOIOIIM— lO'-HCOClCOCO 
COTt<00:Dl005COCOlCl03COCOO<N 
ajCO00^00T*C0lOC0COO5C0lO-«l<00 ■ • ■ 


M00tJ<^5OC:C010O(M— iTjl<N(MCO 


- 


<1 
> 


•qojBH 


LO 00— cooccr-ooi^OM 

. lO t- C5 CO Si t^ O CO l^ OO CO O lO lO 
gCO^CC^lO'J^r-rt'OOOOQOCi'C^ICOCO • 


ij 


^OI:^03eiO'OC3C3CO(M-*COCOTt< 




!z; 


•XjBnaqaj 


00 LlCOl^COlCt^CCC^I — oo 
M — O <M t r 03 (N <M O r^ Oi O CS Tt< 

CO>t^»OOCN(MOCOO— — t^CSOO • • • 


O.J 00 O O S^l t^ (M O lO Tf CC CO CO rt< 


Q 


•^CiBnuBf 


• ociC5(NC5co — — i-*ro;o-^oc5 

^ — 1 CO O t^ tC C5 t^ C; CO t^ lO (M — -^ • 




►J 

a 

H 

iz; 
o 


JO jaquin^j 

•■jsboo uiojj 
ojukjsiq; 


• — ^ -f -* CO ■ 

S O <N 1- -O --O -^ O O CO — < X O-l lO O 00 
-3 l^ — 00 1- 1.0 — • iM — 1 — — — 
— CO iC CO <N IM rH 


•■)|)tn!,iuo'[ 


c-i — ' o 1^ oo "C CO — 1 » (N » ;c (M V o 

-fincOCOCOCO— t(MlO'MCO'#-H<MCO 

Woi?;^2-?oc;x — 2h^?-ooo2-icoo 

— — <N CO CO CO -t -t -t -t -f 1-0 "-0 1.0 1.0 


o 
lO IM 


o 


•apniiiBI 


—1 l^ l.O X 1.0 -.C 1 - X O CO C. 1.0 <M CO -* 00 't 

_ -H no -t CO 1-0 10 -t 10 10 1.0 lO — 1 1.0 C^ C<l (M CO 

CO oooooooooooooooo 

— 1 — OCOtM-f— 'Ol^C^l-t-fcOI-COiOO 

0.1COCO'M01COCOCOCO-tCOCOCO'MO<I^H»-H 


-<5 


5 




^ * 




. .§„ . .1 . . t . .= .i 

'5_c? 0.2S 1/ 0- O 2.3 2 ^ ^-^-^^ ^ 



s 

^ 





o 


4^ 




H 


O 




JO 


Ci 


















■73 
C 




O 


, 




CO 


o 




M 








Oi 




0) 


CM 




;-! 


-P O 






CQ 4J 




CC 


cS 


1> 




o »o 


u 




O 00 


3 


P-i 


M "^ 


rft 


OJ 


OJ <M 


1> 


bo 


^ ^ 


L. 


crt 


^1 


0. 


0) 

> 


O 


crt 


O 






i=l m 




, ^ 


^■s aj 








E 

o 






^ 




a> ;^ 


oa 


4^ 


0. 2 


— 


o 


%< 




4^ 


M-T C 




g 






j3 Oi 




c3 


O ^ 
bJD C 




O 


rO CO 




P^ 


r^ Ol 






IS 




cj 


O QJ 



M-l 


o 

CO 


Pi 




bO 




ai 




i=l 


05 


bO 






C4 


m 




i-l 




Ph 




o 


o 


O) 




+J 


> 






00 


Bj 




0) 


<U 






i=l 


.a 
























fl 






cd 


fi 


!>, 


HI 




^ 


r.d 








r) 


o 


t3 


;3 


n 






fl 








03 
1-5 


o 

CO 


o 


:3 


d 




CO 


ni 


HH 


CM 



156 



Federal Handbook. 



03 


4i 


-73 


H 


d 


g 


a 


< 


c3 


cS 




-^:S 


-4^ 




73 
1-5 


0) 


.s 

'■+3 

d 
o 






rJ:3 


o 




N 


-»^ 


(U 


Q 


> 


CO 


4^ 


< 








q 


<V 


T^ 


o 


z 


■ rJ2 


O) 




<ii 


O o3 


pis! 




C-l 


C5 Ol 
■ O 


c3 




OD 


05 '^3 

(N o 


s 




Q 


o a 


t^ 


0-' 


<1 


-^ r„ 


bf) 


^ 


o -^ 


fl 


t-i 


« 


I— 1 <i> 

O 13 
CO c« 


M 
CS 
O 


CO 


1-^ 
CO 



O P-i 



11 



r1 • '-I 

s S g 

•d c3 Pi 



=e ^ 



o a 



b '^ 

S-l <i> 



d "43 

c 

O c3 <1> 



s § 



4> 






-1^ 



a 

o 

o " 

2 - 

+3 ^ 
d o 
o S3 



■^ {-I w 

id a 08 

ri ^ o 

® S « 

r< 5 <1> 

-S g So 

O) P-I 

►> cS Oi 



CO 



« 






:;3 .:: 



►^ o 






« <D 3 

S^-d o . 

^^ ^ 

t>.o 5 

►5 o 



S .. 



2 s 

^ o 

« CO 

52 ^ 

S o 



d R 
pq 



Q 

J 

O 



M 

O 

Eh 



o — 



-gooGoocioioooooooociooooox 

CCICIOOICIOOOOOOCJOIOOOOOS: 

o X '^^ « -- ~ ~ r^ — -M -^ r^ l- lo — u- -m i- o 
-y -M -c r^ 1- -+ — -^ X c: X C-. o — I w X o c-j c — I 
c t^ t^ c: X t- =-. X X c; X X ao t- ci X C-. cr. X oc 

-^*;l^";lz.i«jlz.,A- — ^ — J^ — — — ■ ■ 

CM?! ?i ?J ?i ?i 5i ?i ?i ?i ?^ Ji 5i ?j 55 ?i 55 <ri c^i 

0'M-*'M-t't'+r^C:-tc^io;£Xr;-t-r:"--f 
»: X 05 o — C- t^ M -t L- X lO c; t^ t^ Lt 1- o c: o 

ot^i^s:c;xs;c;ciC500i>xc;c:(r:ociX 

'o oi c; ci s; C-. c; cr. c; C5 C-- c; c: c; C5 C-. c. o c; c; 

C S^ I^ •M ~J 5^ ^) C-l M ^ !M (M M -M 5^1 ■>] M « 0-J O 



OXXOOiXC:OCiC5C>C5XXSJC;0 



M X r^ w --S ^ C<l r^ iC O --C c: -t c: -^ — C >-': X 
ojcsoiocit — f'ftN— <xc;ro--£— I — ^xx— 1 
oxooocioooocioxxooooooj 



O — X -f X O C-1 o 

03 O; Lt X C: L- O -t Ci 

oxcio — o — 



(M t c c: -^ r^ X -t •-£ 

■ -^ •£■ ^ y^ X v~ <^ :^ c^ rn 



tc 'N o X i^ M -*' »s 'M CI t^ c; 1^ C: ~ r; :^ n re 

J^•■'• X — ^ — — — — — — X-' — — — /^ — -^~ 

C<M5i?c??re??SS7C?5??5i??r^??r^?tc^5i 



X C: u- 'M re X 
X t^ o ^ 5 O ^. 



5<i ->) r: r: ^: 



ry: -t 55 Pf o I; 55 le ft P e) o c; 2 r: X c ?; ^ X 

'0!35C5OOOOC:OOOOC5OOOOOO0S 
CCv|(NMrereMierororercMre«JCreMre(N 

r; r c c. re -.r; e -t re c. — l- i- ei re •- re -rj — 

•J-; — -t r- -^ X — ei ~ — ' c: o ^ 2 2 t^ 2 2 i "^^ 

c55 55reS5irererererere55'>5rererere5ee^ 



IC X o 
-/ -^ i~ cr: 
s; t- t^ c: 






re -t -f 

o » c; 



l> O X O c: Oi 
re e<i re s: e<i 05 

O C O Ci Cl t~ 



e^i ea re n re 



X — t^~-f — >-e — r- — "Nxxioce — rexe^i 

•roree^ioreioore-^oco — ;sx-+:c(MLex 
ct-t^ciot--oo3Ci»oc53:3;ooc;o;»xt^ 

c e^i e<i "M 'M M e^3 5-1 'M "M re ei e<i c<i e^i e<i c^ c<i (N (M 

•/ 02 c<l — I 3 C; — t^ S C -r; ^ re 55 55 O -^ c; re CO . 

aicor~c;xi^fflxxo5C505XC:«C5c; xxc~ 



— 


-* t^ 


_ 


r- 


O 


_ 


la o 


— 


O O CO 


* 


M =r 


« «■! "* O 


ei c<5 


Ct 


»-H 


cc re 






■M 


c: 


^H 


w 


00 t 




^^ 


"— • 




P 5 






157 




158 



Federal Handbook. 



Gpaph showing Mean iUonthly Ataosptieric Pressure of 
Principal Cities in Australia. 



[JnT 


Ja« 


FtB 


IIUi!|ApKlUyJjTOJJuLJAuGpEPjOaiNov. Dec 


jANJFEi 


Mak 


Apu'MAy.JuNJJuLiAu&'Sep.lOcT.iNm 

— {—4—1—1 — 1 — — U- 


Dec 


Jm 


Fe8jM« 

— 1 — 


h^ 


liUy.|Ju)i,JuL|Au6,5tr 

D _ 


Ocr.fNwiOtcNw 


301 
3M 
299 
»8 







= 




1 


= 


^ 








= 


E 




Hh- 






^4= 


ZI 


ZI 




;:^ 


E 


-1 


=1^ 


q 


— 




7US 
7S20 

ra»5 

ISM 












^--. 




































f^ 




_r'+^ 






— 




— 


— 


^>^ 


— t— 






~ 


==-, 


^ 


- 


P 


zA 


7^ 


^ 




— 




— '--T^ 


— 


— 






A 




— 


_ 


= 


— 


t-H 


297 




^ 


= 


— Bnr 


— 1 — 

— ! — 1 






= 


-_^ 


ML 


^ 


^ 


''- 


-B 










5 


i=: 






— 


— 




~ 


Mi 


7»« 


301 
300 




= 


E 




III 1 




E 




















— 


— 




E 


= 






^ 


E 


erthIzz 


zl 




, — 1 — . 


Tim 




= 


= 


1 


' 1 — 


^ 


i;;^ 


^ 






zz 


-2 


te 






-• 




!s 




^ 


= 


;^ 




^ 


£ 


= 


= 


^ 


■il; 


-^:^4- 


299 




~? 


2 






-4— 


-H 


'— 














-^ 


— 










5 


s 






z: 


z: 




— 




z: 


zz 


^•^ 


7SN 










1 
































































1 
















































— ,owi 


301 
300 
]»3 










Newcastle 














SvbNE 


















ztBolll 










■ 




— 


— 






1 — 




- 






* 


l^_ 




, 












1 




, 










— 


— 




i_ ^ 1, 


— 


h- 






— 1 — h-^ 
- 1 1 J 




1 — 


"4 








— 


' 




=; 


— ; 


?=i 




— t— 


ZI 


— 





■KK 


— 


— 


zl 






^i 


::5 




ST— 




— 


H^ 









^ 




rz 


-^ 


■3^ 


^ 




^ 




=*=^ 






— 






— 










— 




sT 




'^^Y 














:?^ 


^h- 


— 1 


— ' 


1 — \ — 






tr— 














, 












— 1 — i — 


- 




, 




1 — 1 — 




1 










—j — 1 — 




1 




3M 
300 
»E 
296 
297 




— 


— 




\l!OF 








^=^4- 


J 1 1 


-1/.. 1 








Hj 






— ' 


Br('|KFN Hill 


- 









IMS 








/ 


Ol'KII 


K-S 








' 




.KALGOOfLIE 




' 






















— 


— 








^^^5 — 




— 




— 








t--td 








— 


-^ 






-y 


h- 


— T "i 


h- 






— 




— 


-- 


~7 


;< 




— 


N 




— 














— 


— 




k 




1 — 1 


— 


—^ 






M- 




-H^ 






— 








/ 










S 










"Z 










' 


s 










/ 














s 




Wl 






. 














>. 








y 














s 






















V 








/ 














\ 
























V 


^ 




















'>» 








1 
















s 
































1 




















































































TM 






— 




— 


— 


1 — , 















• — 1 — 






_ 










, 




, 


— 1 











..;. 








3M 




— 


= 


Adf 


Air 


F^ 




= 








— f— 


h 


^Benbigq^ 




^4- 


— 






— 


' — ' — ! — 1 — 
Ballarat" 














MS 


— 


— 


— 











— 








— -I— 


u 




— 








-- 


U- 


— 




— 


RTi 


— 
















— 




,^— — ^, 


^"^ 












; 






^ 


^^^ 




















^ 












V 






-J 




Vr- 











L_ 


V-A 






- 





k^ 


\— 






_^ 











— 1 




1 


fc 









1 


299 

7<« 


— 


~p 








— 






^ 










^ 








1 1 




S3 




— 


— ] 






LE_ 


— 1 




~ 




-=" 


p«=: 




1 ' 


XM 


=: 




— 








1 








y 
























y 


















, 
















^- |— 
















**- 




; 


















im 











— 1 — 









, 







J 1 











1 , 




1 







— 








1 1 


1 




V- 


aoi 
aoo 

299 

2M 


— 


1 — 


i 1 u 








— 








1 






— 


Q 








, — 


— 










H 




L^ 


— 1 


— 












1 IN 


lLEOURNE 














Geeidng _ 


















r 


loPARl 




IZ 








= 


— 
































































-t- 


























[-»-» 












- 


1 
















... 




^ 










^ 


—J — 




— 


~ 




^ 










hs— 


— 


— 










— 




L 


L-l 




— 




'^j— 




— 


Ph 




=^ 


x_ 


K-^ 


E 






n 








h- 


s^ 


— 


^ 






-^ 


= 




5r 






— 


bsH 














1 1 


























^ 
















^^ 




^ 














1 






















































It' 




1 — 




LL= 


L 


1 1 















--- 









1 







, 







U 


1 



Note. —Each vertical space represents '05 of an inch or 126 n^illimeU^8e. 

Fio. 14. 



Climate op Australia. 159 



12. Winds. 

The most conspicuous winds of Australia are the south-east trades which 
blow almost continuously over the northern half of the continent, and the 
westerly winds, or " roaring forties," which, during the winter months, extend 
northwards over the whole of the southern areas. Both these winds, however, 
are strongly deflected by continental or monsoonal influences, so much so 
that in summing up the average prevailing direction of wind in different 
parts of Australia, particularly over the southern portions, these two great 
systems of wind circulation are almost obscured. 

On the south coastal areas, for example, we find that the average prevail- 
ing direction has a strong southerly component during the summer months 
and northerly component during the winter months ; to the north of the 
continent a strong northerly component during the summer months and 
southerly during winter months. On the New South Wales coast the mean 
direction in summer is from the north-east, and in winter from the west. 

On the Western Australian coast the mean direction during the summer 
months is from south-west to south-east, and during the winter from north- 
north-west to north-north-east. 

Inland the mean direction of wind is largely dominated by the seasonal 
distribution of pressure, thus, during the winter months, when anticyclones 
are constantly building up pressure in the interior, there is a decided spiral 
contra clockwise circulation from the centre toward? the coast line of the 
continent. 

During the summer time, owing to the strong convectional action in the 
interior and consequently lowered pressure, the circulation is reversed and a 
clockwise spiral circulation obtains from the ocean to the centre of the con- 
tinent. Minor factors of wind control are occasional cyclones chiefly on the 
east and north-west coast lines, and tornadoes which may occur in any part 
of Australia during the summer months, but most frequently over inland 
areas. These tornadoes generally develop in extensive barometric col areas 
or over zones where the pressure is uniform and without isobaric control, 
or in the north-eastern or northern gradients of cyclonic depressions moving 
across the southern interior of the continent, the gradients again being very 
slight. They generally travel on a north-north-west to south-south-east 
course, and at times are so strong as to level strips of country forest and 
destroy townships. 

A north-east sea-breeze (black north-easter) is a notable feature of Sydney 
Harbor weather. It starts to blow about 10 a.m. on bright summer mornings, 
gradually increasing in force until 3 p.m., when it often reaches a velocity 
of 30 or 40 miles per hour ; from that hour it gradually moderates, and gener- 
ally ceases with sundown. The depth of this wind is comparatively slight, 
and, moreover, it does not ordinarily penetrate inland beyond a distance of 
10 to 20 miles. 

13. Southerly Bursters. 

Southerly bursters are a distinctive feature of summer weather on the 
coast of New South Wales, occurring most frequently between the months of 
September and Februaiy inclusive, and between the hours of 7 p.m. and mid- 
night. 



160 Federal Handbook. 



As the name implies, the wind comes suddenly from the southerly quarter, 
causing a fall in temperature of from 20 to 40 degrees in the 24 hours, the most 
rapid decline taking place during the first hour of the blow. The mean 
velocity is about 32 miles per hour, and many of the gusts may reach a rate 
of 80 miles and over per hour. The blows may last for a few hours only or 
for several days, the duration being dependent upon the extent of the anti- 
cyclone to the west. 

Thunderstorms frequently accompany the bursts, but useful rains only 
occur when the centres of the high pressure are travelling in high latitudes. 

The rate of translation of a burster along the coast is about 20 miles per 
hour, but has no relation to the velocity of the prevailing wind. A mild 
burster may be translated at a rate of 60 miles per hour from point to point 
on the coast or may occur simultaneously. On the other hand, a violent 
burster may be translated from place to place under a rate of 20 miles per 
hour. 

The explanation is as follows : — 

Bursters, while being undoubtedly deflected sea-breezes, occur generally 
with the passage of the axis of V-shaped depressions backed up by anti- 
cyclones to the west of them. The change of wind takes place from a northerlv 
to a southerly component at the moment when the axis happens to coincide 
with or cross any point, but as the axes of these depressions are constantly 
varying in their angular relation to the coastline, it follows that the rate of 
translation must vary accordingly. If the axis takes the same angle as the 
coastline the burster occurs almost coincidently on all parts of the coast. 
If the axis is vertical or runs from north-west to south-east, translation is from 
south to north ; this is the general experience, but it has happened that 
the bursters have worked down the coast, owing to the axes of the depres- 
sion on such rare occasions running from a south-west to a north-east 
direction. 

Southerly bursters are most frequent during seasons of sporadic rains 
in the interior, and least frequent during exceptionally rainy seasons in the 
interior, which is strong evidence that they are a response to intense heat 
convectional action inland. 

The average number of visitations in a season is 32, the greatest number, 
•58, was recorded in the year 1896, and the least, 16, in the year 1890, when 
vast areas of western New South Wales were under the flood waters of the 
Darling River. 

They can always be looked for on hot days, but the most reliable attending 
indications are, first, the proximity of a V depression or relatively low baro- 
meters in comparison with those over Victoria. A foggy morning following 
a hot day is also a sure sign, and the local barometer invariably starts to rise 
slowly several hours before their advent. With these known facts they now 
rarely arrive without ample warning being given. 

They are analogous to the Pamperos of Argentina. 

The term " Brickfielder " now applied to hot dusty northerly winds on 

he gold-fields of Victoria was the first name given to southerly bursters in 

Sydney. They were then called brickfielders because brickfields in the 

early days were worked to the south of the infant city, and with the arrival 

of southerlies clouds of dust from these fields were brought to the northern 



Climate of Australia. 161 

end of the town. With the migration of citizens of Sydney to the gold- 
fields of Victoria half-a-century ago these miners transferred the name to 
the hot dusty northerlies prevailing there. 

The Fremantle doctor is the name given to the local sea-breeze at the 
chief Western Australian port. It is a cool wind from the south-west, 
generally starting soon after midday during the summer months, and, of 
course, moderating with the declining sun. 

The name of " Cock Eye Bob " is the name given to thunder squalls which 
occur frequently on the north-west coast of Western Australia during the 
summer months. 

14. Hurricanes. 

The two zones of Australia subject to visitations of hurricanes are the 
north-west coast of Western Australia and the north coast of Queensland. 
The hurricanes on the former are known as " willy willies," and are, perhaps, 
the more violent of the two. The storms occur between the months of 
November and April inclusive, but more frequently during January and 
March. 

They appear to originate in the vicinity of Cambridge Gulf, or even as 
far east as Darwin. They then start on a parabolic course along the north- 
west coast line, gradually intensifying until they reach the latitudes of Condon 
and Cossack, where they generally reach their greatest energy and cause 
considerable damage to the pearling fleets as well as to property on shore. 
From this position on the north-west coast they then usually recurve inland, 
gradually expanding in dimensions, and, travelling through the Murchison 
and Coolgardie gold-fields, where they precipitate at times torrential rains, 
finally pass into the Great Bight, thence following the course of the 
southern depressions. 

Whim Creek on the north-west coast has frequently received 10 inches 
of rain from the passage inland of these hurricanes. On 3rd April, 1898, 
29 • 41 inches were registered for the 24 hours, together with a fall of 7 ■ 08 
on the previous day, a total of 36-49 inches within 48 hours. 

The isobaric indications are a high-pressure system over sub-tropical 
areas, and an incipient low on the north-west coast. When local barometers 
show signs of falling with an easterly wind, conditions are conducive to the 
development or approach of " willy willies," and precautions should be 
taken accordingly. 

A rapid fall with increasing force of wind from the east may be regarded 
as a definite indication of a heavy blow. 

The pearl divers affirm that 24 hours' notice is always given of the approach 
of these storms by a sub-ocean swell, and mariners further say that the sky 
assumes a pale-green aspect for a day or so before the hurricane arrives. 

The hurricanes on the north-east coast occur most frequently between 
January and April, but occasionally they may appear as late as June. I'he 
embryo stage begins generally in the South Seas in latitude 8° or 10° S.; 
they follow the same parabolic course as the western hurricanes, and 
almost invariably strike the coast between 15° and 20° S. latitude, in 
which zone they exhibit their most violent phases, but they not infrequently 
first present themselves as far south as Brisbane, travelling thence down the 
C.1215i L 



162 Federal Handbook. 



east coast as far as Sydney, and finally passing off into the Tasman Sea. 
The rain from these hurricanes is in all cases very heavy over coastal and 
highland areas, over which their influence extends. 

One of these hurricanes struck Port Douglas on 16th March, 1911. 
Besides the loss of two lives it practically destroyed the township, together 
with all the meteorological equipment, so that no local rain was recorded, 
but at South Mosman, 8 miles distant, the total rain registered in 24 hours 
was 16*10 inches, while during a similar visitation towards the end of the 
month, over 63 inches fell at the same place in five days, distributed as 
follows :— 3-44 on 30th ; 9 00 on 31st ; 31 53 on 1st April ; 13 74 on 7th ; 
and 5-64 on the 3rd. During the fall of the 31-53 inches the following 
measurements were recorded : — 8 • 28 inches in 7| hours, 9-70 in 3 hours, 
3-93 in 2 hours, and 9 62 in 11^ hours. 

The Admiralty Hydrographic Office, in 1897, published the following 
remarks and advice concerning tropical hurricanes on the Queensland 
coast : — 

Tropical hurricanes on the coast of Queensland may be expected during 
the summer months, namely, December, January, February, March, and the 
early part of April. These storms appear to originate between latitudes 
8° to 12° S., and between the meridians of 155° E. and 170° W. On reaching 
the Queensland coast they may strike the land at any point between lati- 
tudes 12° and 26° — that is, between Cape Grenville and Wide Bay. To the 
southward of latitude 26° S. these storms break up into heavy gales. If, 
during the summer months, and the early part of April, a heavy swell sets 
in from north-east, and there is little or no wind at the time, bad weather 
is certain, for the sea always is in advance of a cyclone. With the glass 
steadily falling, heavy rains, and murky sky, winds between south-south- 
east and east a cyclone may be expected. These storms may extend some 
distance inland, but their centres do not often pass the coastal ranges, which 
appear to repel them, and they usually emerge from the coast between 
Broadsound and Cape Moreton. If the barometer is high over a considerable 
portion of the coast, the storm will recurve some distance ofi" the land, and 
the wind will be from south-east to south. If, on the contrary, the barometer 
is low in front of the storm, it will blow home on the land as far as the coast 
range, and cause floods. When this happens the first of the gale wiU be 
southerly, the latter part northerly. The bearing of the storm centre will 
be at right angles with the waves line. Thus, on a fine day if there is a 
heavier sea than usual breaking on the beach, and it is coming from the 
north-east, if the direction remains the same or nearly so, and the barometer 
is not above 30 inches, the gale will blow home on the land, and the first 
signs of bad weather will not precede the gale by more than 12 hours, but 
if the direction of the swell changes to the eastward the storm is recurving, 
and the body of it will not reach the land. When the swell is from the east 
the storm centre is past ; when there is anything southing in the line of the 
swell the storm has passed. No matter how threatening the weather signs 
may be, if the line of swell comes first from the southward, there will be only 
an ordinary south polar storm, with a low temperature. 



Australian Vegetation. 



103 



CHAPTER V. 

AUSTRALIAN VEGETATION. 

By J. H. Maiden, F.L.S., Government Botanist of New South Wales, and 
Director of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney. 



SYNOPSIS. 



1. 


Intbodttctoby ; Area ; the Geocol. 




2. 


Botanical Statistics. 




3. 


Vernacular Navies for Attstbalian 
Plants. 




4. 


Some Problems of the Pastoral 
Industry. 


12 


5 


Weed Legislation. 


13 


6. 


Ring BARKING. 


14 


7, 


Destruction of Forests. 




8. 


Scrub and Brush. 




9 


Natural Hybrids. 




10. 


Use of the Term " Desert " in 
Australia. Adaptation to En- 
vironment. 




11. 


Origin of the Australian Flora. 
(a) The Original Australian Ele- 
ment. 





(6) The Austro-Malayan (includ- 
ing Papuan) Element. 
(c) The Antarctic Element (so 

called). 
Affinities with the South African 

Flora. 
The Australian Flora as a Whole. 
The Flora of the Indrtdual 
States — 

(a) Western Australia. 

(b) South Australia (including 

Part of the Northern 
Territory). 

(c) Victoria. 
{d} Tasmania. 

(e) New South Wales. 
(/) Queensland. 



1. Introductory; Area; the Qeocol. 

The first impression of Australia is the vastness of its area — it covers about 
3 millions (2,974,600) of square miles, the area of the United States being 
2,973,890, while that of Europe is 3,860,368 square miles. 

The population of Europe is approximately 452 millions ; that of Aus- 
tralia being 4| millions ; while our island continent is infinitely less inter- 
sected by gulfs, rivers, roads, and other means of communication. It is, 
therefore, not to be surprised at that much country is imperfectly explored 
botanically, and generalizations have often to take the place of the statements 
of fact which are available in older and comparatively densely populated 
territories. 

A glance at a map of Australia will show that, with the exception of Tas- 
mania, the boundaries of the States are almost entirely artificial and not 
physical ones. If we contemplate the central State, South Australia, its 
boundaries between Western Australia on the one hand, and Queensland, 
New South Wales, and Victoria on the other, consist entirely of straight 
lines, while most of the dividing line between New South Wales and Queens- 
land is similarly artificial. 

Nevertheless, it is found convenient in practice to register the records of 
species according to the political divisions, and later on, vague as these records 
are, and must be, as the interior boundaries are approached, it will be found 
that they will facilitate the definition of truly scientific botanical areas, on 
ecological and other lines. Much more attention requires to be paid to the 
work of defining the range of individual plants, and it would be desirable 
to see established throughout the continent agencies or outposts in touch 
with organizations for the record of official or unofficial botanical surveys. 



164 Federal Handbook. 



Australia has been divided by Gregory* into three main divisions. 

1. The Western Plateau. — A vast plateau which comprises more than the 
western half of the continent, formed of very ancient rocks, and which does 
not appear to have been below sea-level during recent geological times, 
except in the north-western part. On the north-west and south of the 
Australia coast, plains skirt the foot of the plateau, containing marine rocks of 
several distinct periods. Owing to the arid nature of the climate in the 
interior, the surface of the remains of the plateau is generally level. 

2. The Great Plains, extending from the Gulf of Carpentaria across the 
continent to the Southern Ocean, between the mouth of the Murray and the 
coast of Western Victoria. 

3. The Eastern Highlands which occur between the Great Plains and the 
eastern coast ; they extend from Cape York Peninsula on the north, to Bass' 
Straits on the south, and are continued still farther by the island of Tasmania. 
A smaller highland area joins the western plateau in the vicinity of Spencer's 
and St. Vincent's Gulfs as far as Lake Torrens, the Flinders' Eange being the 
highest land. 

Griffith Taylor has put the classification into a somewhat different form — 
(a) The Eastern Highlands. 
(6) Murray-Darling Lowlands. 

(c) South Australian Highlands and Rifts or the Cambrian Divide. 
{d) The Great Artesian Basin, 
(e) The Great Tableland or Plateau Region. 
The Geocol. — Taylorf has applied the term Geocol to gaps in the Main 
Divide of Eastern Australia. Thus there are northern, central, and southern 
highlands or plateaus in New South Wales, which form " land massifs " and 
which are separated from each other by broad relatively depressed areas 
(geocols). He has given further particulars in regard to five geocols of south 
east Australia and their influences on intercommunication. J 

E. C. Andrews has also worked at the eastern Geocols, which are as 
follows : — 

1. The Ealmore, Victoria, Gap or Geocol is about 1,200 feet above 

sea-level and a few miles wide. The Melbourne express passes 
it about 60 miles from Melbourne. 

2. The Cooma or Monaro Geocol, New South Wales, (or Australian 

Rift, as Taylor has it), is about 2,000-2,600-3,000 feet above 
sea-level, is of fair width, and stretches from Omeo through 
Bombala to Cooma. 

3. The Lake George Geocol, New South Wales, is about 2,000 feet 

above sea-level. 

4. The Cassilis or Hunter Geocol, New South Wales, is about 20-30 

miles broad and 1,700 feet above sea-level, and is responsible for 
the long dry loop extending from Gilgandra almost to Newcastle. 
New England fi'om the head of the Allyn, the Chichester, and the 
Paterson, to Cunningham's Gap (2,000 feet), in South Queens- 
land, presents an excessively rough and high plateau front to 
the coast. 

• ' Geography, structural, physical, and comparative," p. 258 and plate XXIX. 

t Proc. Unn. Soc, N.S.W., XXXI., 517 ; " Australia, physiographic and economic," p. 225. 

i " Physiog. of Eastern Australia," Bulletin No. 8, Commonwealth Bureau of Meteorology. 



Australian Vegetation. 



165 



5. Another broad gap occurs near Toowoomba, Queensland, and is 

traversed by the Brisbane train from Toowoomba to Warwick. 
Greatest height, 2,000 feet. 

6. The Kockhampton-Longreach Railway, Queensland, also traverses 

a gap about 1,500 feet in height. Its width is not known to the 
writer. 

7. The Cairns-Chillagoe Line, Queensland, rises on to the Kuranda 

Gap (1,100 feet), which is in the form of a broad valley lying 
between plateaus on each side. Heights from 4,000-5,000 
feet. 

8. The Townsville-Charters Towers Railway, Queensland, also passes 

in a deep wide valley of low height between high ranges. 
The number of gaps or geocols existent has not yet been determined, but 
it is desirable to draw attention to their importance in regard to the distribu- 
tion of plants. The writer has specially worked at the Cassilis geocol in 
this connexion, and has a considerable list of western New South Wales 
plants which have used this gap for the purpose of migrating towards the 
coast. 

2. Botanical Statistics. 

Seven thousand eight hundred and thirty-seven species were described in 
Bentham's Flora Australiensis. In 1889, at page 8 of his fourth supplement 
to his Systematic Census of Australian Plants, Mueller gave the number of 
vascular plants as 8,909 ; genera, 1,394 ; families, 149. 

Divided into States, he gave — 

3,559 



South Australia 


1,904 


Tasmania 


1,030 


Victoria 


1,904 


New South Wales 


3,260 


Queensland . . 


3,711 


North Australia 


1,977 



Based on the work of the Government Botanists of the various States, 
the following estimates of described species may be submitted as approxi- 
mately true to-day ; if the present activity continues during the next few 
years the numbers will be much increased. 

Western Australia 



South Australia 


1,985 


Tasmania 


1,210 


Victoria 


2,000 


New South Wales 


3,600 


Queensland . . 


4,480 


North Australia 


2,050 



Mueller includes the floras of Lord Howe and Norfolk Islands, which 
should be deducted from the total of 8,909 to the extent of about 92 species 
peculiar to those islands ; we thus have 8,817 as Mueller's real total of Aus- 
tralian plants irrespective of the numbers of plants found in individual 
States. 



166 



Federal Handbook. 



To this total may be added 1,856, the number of additional species of which 
the present writer has record since the date of Mueller's Second Census. The 
number is undoubtedly understated, since this record must be imperfect, 
in spite of the fact that it is carefully kept. This makes the number of 
phanerogams and vascular cryptogams recorded for Australia as 10,673. 

Time has not been available to separate the additions into their various 
States, nor to add to Mueller's totals of species for the various States, the 
additions recorded by the writer to the States' localities of those species 
as given in the Second Census. 

Of this number (8,909) Mueller stated that 7,501 are endemic, and, of 
the remaining 1,338, or 15 "1 per cent., there are found in Europe 160; Asia, 
1,032; Africa, 515; America, 315; Polynesia, 558; New Zealand, 291. These 
figures have not been brought up to date. 

Mueller gave the following families with species as under (all after the 
plus marks are the writer's) 

1. Leguminosae 

2. MyrtacesE 

3. Proteaceae 

4. Compositae 

5. Cyperaceae 

6. Gramineae 

7. Orchideae 

8. Epacridaceae 

9. Euphorbiaceae 

10. Goodeniaceae 

11. Filices . . 

12. Rutaceae 

13. Liliaceae 

14. Rubiaceae 

15. Sterculiaceae 

16. Labiatae 

17. Chenopodiaceae (Salsolaceae) 

18. Malvaceae 

19. Umbelliferae 

20. Sapindaceae 

21. Amarantaceae 

Below this there is no great break, the list ending with fourteen families, 
with, so far, only one species each. 

It will be observed that these additional numbers of species since 
described alter the sequence somewhat. Thus the activity of botanists 
dealing with the Orchideae raises that family above both the Gramineae and 
the Cyperaceae, its position and that of the Cyperaceae being transposed. 
Thus Orchidacese now should have fifth place, Cyperaceae seventh. Goodeni- 
aceae now comes ninth, Filices tenth, Euphorbiaceae eleventh. Sterculiaceae 
now occupies the fourteenth place, Labiatae fifteenth, Rubiaceae sixteenth, 
Chenopodiaceae seventeenth, Umbelliferae eighteenth, Sapindaceae nineteenth, 
Malvaceae twentieth, Amarantaceae twenty-first. 



1,084 + 


192 = 


1,276 (1) 


666 + 


150 = 


816 (2) 


599 -f- 


68 = 


667 (3) 


541 + 


94 - 


635 (4) 


379 + 


42 = 


421 (7) 


352 + 


81 = 


433 (6) 


287 + 


152 = 


439 (5) 


275 + 


26 = 


301 (8) 


226 -f- 


25 - 


251 (11) 


219 + 


75 = 


294 (9) 


212 -t- 


43 = 


255 (10) 


190 + 


42 = 


232 (12) 


163 -f- 


26 = 


189 (13) 


127 -1- 


20 = 


147 (16) 


125 + 


30 = 


155 (14) 


125 + 


23 = 


148 (15) 


113 + 


33 = 


146 (17) 


110 -f- 


13 = 


123 (20) 


107 + 


38 - 


145 (18) 


101 -t- 


25 = 


126 (19) 


100 + 


19 = 


119 (21) 



Australian Vegetation. 167 

Some of the largest genera comprise the following species (in some cases 
the numbers are approximations, the writer having been unable to critically 
examine them) : — 

Acacia, 412 ; Eucalyptus, 230 ; Grevillea, 193 ; Styphelia (in the 
Muellerian sense), 193 ; Melaleitca, 112 ; Candollea [Stylidium), 
112 ; Goodenia, 112 ; Hakea, 107 ; Hibbertia, 104 ; Pultencea, 
93 ; EremophUa, 91 ; Schoenus, 77 ; Pimelea, 76 ; Ptilotus, 76 ; 
Panicum, 75 ; Boronia, 72 ; Eriostemon (in the Muellerian sense), 
72 ; Cyperus, 72 ; Aster, 71 ; Helichrysum, 70 ; Sccevola, 68 ; 
BcBchea, 66 ; Daviesia, 64 ; Cryptandra, 63 ; Drosera, 62 ; Per- 
soonia, 62 ; Ficus, 62 ; Fimbristylis, 58 ; Haloragis, 56 ; Solanum, 
55 ; Helipterum, 53 ; Dodoncea, 51 ; Prostanthera, 50 ; PA?/^ 
lanthiis, 50 ; Dryandra, 49 ; Banksia, 48 ; Dendrobium, 45 ; 
Jacksonia, 44 ; Brachycome, 41 ; Bossicea, 41 ; Hibiscus, 39 ; 
Gastrolobium, 37 ; Lasiopetalum, 35. 

Approximately 700 species have been recorded in lists of species recorded 
under States, as common to western and eastern Australia, but because of 
the vagueness of the State boundaries already referred to, and because of 
the imperfection of the record, especially as the interior is reached, such 
statistics are very imperfect, and certainly of limited value unless recorded 
for definite plant-zones. 

The genera (taking cognisance only of those represented in the 700 by 4 
or more species) include Sida, Abutilon, Dodoncea, Claytonia, Ptilotus, Atriplex, 
Rhagodia, Kochia, Bassia, Salicornia, Pimelea, Swainsona, Cassia, Acacia, 
Haloragis, Melaleuca, Eucalyptus, Hydrocotyle, Loranthus, Brachycome, Aster, 
Helipterum, Helichrysum, Angianthus, Senecio, Goodenia, Eremophila, Myo- 
porum, Styphelia, Pterostylis, Xerotes, Triglochin, J uncus, Centrolepis, Cyperus, 
Scirpus, Gahnia, Carex, Panicum, Andropogon, Stipa, Poa, Eragrostis. 

Few of the genera are confined to country of low rainfall, but the species 
contained in the 700 and comprised in the above genera are preponderatingly 
those of country of low rainfall, and it would be interesting to endeavour to 
ascertain how far west from the South Australian border the species extend 
into Western Australia, and how far east from the South Australian border 
the same species extend into Queensland and New South Wales. 

3. Vernacular Names for Australian Plants. 

The person who complains (without qualification) of the confusion of 
common names applied to Australian plants, sometimes loses sight of the 
fact that Australia is as large as Em'ope, and that even in Em'ope the appli- 
cation of vernacular names to plants is often profuse and bewildering. The 
Briton, Greek, and Scandinavian have different languages of course, but their 
plant names are (like those of Australians) often uncertain and difficult of 
mterchange. Our difficulties have arisen partly because the continent only 
began to be settled about a century and a third ago, and then by a handful 
of people, very few of whom were educated ; they came to a continent whose 
flora was unknown, even to botanists, and, as they spread into new areas 
they gave similar names to trees which appeared to them to be similar, and 
which, in most cases, have only recently been shown to be different. 



168 Federal Handbook. 



The predominant vegetation (Eucalyptus) has a very similar facies, and 
it is not to be wondered at that the ordinary citizen has shown no greater 
knowledge of it than the botanist. 

Then again the early colonists had a limited vernacvdar, because they could 
only use comparative terms, and the trouble was that the plants of their 
native countries were about as unlike those of their new homes as it was 
possible for them to be. 

Even the aboriginal owners of the soil were split up into tribes with 
different languages, and in the comparatively few cases in which they had 
names for plants at all, these names did not pass current over large areas. 

In some cases the aboriginal names have been adopted by the white 
population. Some attempt has been made to standardize the vernaculars 
for Australian plants, but the chief diificulty arises from the fact that all over 
the world experience shows that most plant names are restricted to small 
areas. However, with the spread of education, it is confidently expected 
that the use of botanical names, at least as to genus, will present fewer 
difficulties. Of course, it must be borne in mind that the study of natural 
history has an attraction for only a limited portion of the population, while 
of the naturalists but few take special interest in plants, and fewer still 
in their vernacular nomenclature. 

4. Some Problems of the Pastoral Industry. 

Australia is a great pastoral country, and, as in other countries, a small 
percentage of sheep and cattle is lost every year through their feeding on 
certain plants. Further investigations are being carried out on this subject, 
but the following facts may be stated : — 

1. Certain forage plants (grasses and others) contain cyanogenetic 

glucosides. Poisonous results take place at certain seasons of 
the year (though perhaps not every year), as regards the same 
plant in a given area. 

2. A few plants contain saponins and even more virulent poisons, 

e.g., certain Leguminosse {Gastrolobium, Isotropis, Oxylohium), 
particularly in Western Australia. 

3. Some succulent plants, e.g., Euphorbia Drummondii.. Boiss, are 

apparently responsible for many deaths among stock, but it 
has been shown that the cause of death is hoven, and that 
only tired and hungry animals, which eat immoderately, are 
affected by them. 

4. Certain Leguminosse (Swainsona) derange the nervous systems of 

stock eating them ; the animals develop an inordinate 
appetite for the plants, eventually becoming so-called Pea-eaters, 
or Indigo-eaters, and absolutely useless to the owner, death 
finally supervening. The symptoms are analogous to those 
known as Lathyrism, Nenta, Loco disease, in other parts of the 
world. 
The United States, South America, and South Africa have problems of 
a like nature before them, and the difficulty is not solved when the plant- 
culprit, be it poisonous or not, is detected. The problem to be solved is how 



Australian Vegetation. 169 

to prevent the deaths of stock by applying either a preventative or an antidote. 
With large flocks and herds spread over large areas, individual treatment 
has special practical difficulties of its own. 

It is a very common and empirical practice to attribute the deaths of stock 
to poison plants. As a matter of fact, Australia appears to possess singularly 
few poison plants which are injurious to stock, or which contain active 
principles which may be utilized as drugs. 

5. Weed Legislation. 

As Australia becomes developed, there is an increasing tendency in all 
the States to increase local self-government, and coping with weeds becomes 
usually one of the functions of local bodies. The underlying idea is that 
local people know what plants are most noxious to them, and the function 
of the State Governments is indorsement of their recommendations for 
proscription of specific weeds, subject to power of veto. This affords the 
necessary Government control, preventing local bodies, which may not have 
special knowledge, taking action prejudicial to their own interests. 

The Prickly Pear (Opuntia) is dealt with by special legislation, both in 
New South Wales and Queensland. What has been stated so far refers to 
weeds after they have got a footing in Australia. 

To prevent the entry of undesirable plants into the Commonwealth, the 
Federal Government in 1908 passed " An Act relating to Quarantine." An 
Appendix to this Act forbids the entry of plants affected by certain diseases 
(chiefly caused by fungi), and mostly affecting economic plants. Another 
Appendix prohibits certain weeds. These weeds have, however, already 
got a firm hold in the Commonwealth, and some are very widely diffused ; 
the object is to put difficulties in the way of the importation of known pests 
into clean areas, leaving the circulation of weed-pests already in the Common- 
wealth the business of the State Governments. 

Many of the Australian weeds were introduced into the country in the very 
first years of settlement. They came from Britain in the packing of goods 
sent in the first fleet, from Rio de Janeiro, the Cape, and Calcutta, the two 
former being ports of call on the outward voyage, and the two latter being 
visited from Sydney for food supplies. Later on a trade in horses with Chilian 
ports was responsible for the introduction of such pi mts as Xanthium 
spinosum. 

As time went by, no restriction of any kind was placed on the introduction 
of plants, and gradually the varieties of weeds increased to the present for- 
midable total, and, being let loose on a virgin continent, brought about 
unexpected results. 

The importation of enormous fodder supplies during periods of drought 
has been a prolific source of introduction of weed seeds, not only from various 
parts of the continent enjoying a good season, but also from beyond seas. 
All the States contain large areas of unalienated lands, and these are sometimes 
an Alsatia for weeds, to the prejudice of the adjoining private owner. With 
the increase of population, this difficulty will largely disappear. 

Prickly Pear. — Members who visit the valley of the Hunter and north- 
western New South Wales and Queensland can scarcely avoid seeing the pes^ 
known as Prickly Pear, for its spread is one of the most remarkable instances 



170 Federal Handbook. 



of plant-aggressiveness known in any part of the world. A form of Opuntia 
inermis, P. DC, has already devastated these two States to such an extent 
as to cause both Governments real anxiety, for the efforts of man have not 
stemmed the rapidity of spread to any considerable extent. In New South 
Wales there are about 2, -500, 000 acres of pear-infested country, and two years 
ago a IMinister of the Crown estimated the cost of eradicating the pear in 
that State to be ten or twelve millions sterling. In Queensland, it is stated 
that 30,000,000 acres are affected, and further, that the spread is one million 
acres per year. This never-ending advance of the pest is its most serious 
feature. 

What has given pear its chance is the fact that in Australia it has practi- 
cally a virgin continent in which to spread. It does not attain its best 
development in the coastal districts, which have a comparatively high rain- 
fall, and a fairly dense population. In the regions climatically suited to it, 
there are but few people, and in broken country it gets a practically impreg- 
nable hold. So tenacious of life is it, and so adapted to its environment, 
that so far no economical method of destruction has been discovered, and the 
difficulty of the problem is enormously increased by the fact that the sides 
and tops of hills, gullies, country fissured and difficult of access, have to 
be left as breeding-places for the pest. 

Less than a dozen species of Opuntia have escaped from cultivation and 
spread to any extent, but all the others put together have not spread a 
millionth as much as the species designated by the writer as Pest-pear. 

Prickly Pear was introduced to Australia (the number of species is 
unknown) from Rio de Janeiro, when Governor Philip touched at that port 
of his outward voyage in 1789, being brought as food for the cochineal insect 
he desired to introduce with the object of founding an industry. 

0. aurantiaca, GUlies, is a small spiny species with brittle joints, wliich 
is spreading both in New South Wales and Queensland, and is a pest also. 
Its brittleness and spininess combine to make it a plant to be dreaded. Under 
the name of " Jointed Cactus " it is a pest in South Africa. 

0. imbricata, P. DC, a cylindrical species with pink flowers, is confined 
to moderately cool districts in New South Wales ; while 0. Dillenii, P. DC, 
a formidable species, and Opuntia {Nopalea) dejecta, Salm-Dyck, are confined 
to Queensland so ter. 

0. nigricans, Haw., and 0. monacantha. Haw., coarse spiny species, occur 
both in New South Wales and Queensland. 

0. tomentosa, Salm-Dyck, a tall, dark-looking species covered with a 
velvety tomentum, is wild in Queensland and northern South Australia, 
but is not looked upon as a pest. 0. jicus-indica. Mill., the " Barbary Fig," 
is well acclimatised and yields an edible fruit. There are a few other species 
of less importance. 

It is not easy to understand why one species or other of Opuntia has not 
spread in one of the other States, but such is the fact, 0. monacantha being 
the only formidable species which is acclimatised in Victoria, South and 
Western Australia, and only to a very limited extent. 

The Pest-pear has a partiality for good soil, and is far less formidable 
in appearance than some of the species just enumerated. It is not tall, 
for the tall species have distinct and separate stems, while this species has 



Australian Vegetation. 171 

ramifying stems hard to disentangle and get at ; it has comparatively few 
spines, but what are really feared are its barbed spinules, which are produced 
abundantly, and cause severe irritation in man and beast. Added to these 
it has a fatal facility for reproduction, being propagated by birds and stock 
which eat the seeds, while every joint or portion of one forms a new plant. 

Eichhornia speciosa, Kunth., the so-called " AVater Hyacinth," originally 
imported fi'om Europe as an ornamental plant, has shown itself very adapted 
to Australian conditions, and from northern New South Wales to central 
Queensland is filling lagoons and clogging water-courses, inflicting very 
severe damage where fresh water for drinking purposes in lagoons and creeks 
is especially valuable, to say nothing of the interference it is causing to navi- 
gation in even moderately large rivers. 

Some of our worst weeds include Bathurst Burr {XantJdum spinosum, L.), 
Noogoora Burr {X. strumarium), Sweet Briar [Rosa ruhiginosa, L.), Black- 
berry {Ruhus jruticosus, L.), Lantana [Lantana Caniara, L.), Prickly Pear 
(Opimtia spp.), Star Thistle {Centaurea calcitrapa, L.), and other species of 
Centaurea, Black Thistle {Carduus lanceolatus, L.), Cape Weed [Crypto- 
stemma calendulaceum, R. Br.), Stinkwort [Inula graveolens, Desf.), Sorrel 
{Rumex acetosella, L.), Dock (Rumex crispus, L.), and other species. Purple- 
top (Verbena honariensis, L.), and others, Corn Gromwell [Lithospermum 
arvense, L.), Yellow Poppy (Argemone mexicana,Jj.), Tree Tobacco (Nicotiana 
glauca, Grah.), Mallow Weed {Modiola caroliniana, L.), Thorn Apple (Datura 
stramonium, L.), Nut G-rass (Cyperus roticndus, L.), Wild Oats (Avena fatua, 
L.). 

6. Ringbarking. 

Visitors to Australia will be interested to see the enormous areas of forest 
land which have been subjected to the process of ringbarking or girdling. 
In the utilization of land for arable purposes the trees are usually removed 
altogether, but over large pastoral areas the lives of the trees have been 
sacrificed simply in order that the grass may grow ; in many cases not because 
of the injury caused to the gi'ass by the shade of the canopy, wliich is often 
small, but because the trees compete with the herbage for the plant food 
and moisture. 

Most of the trees being durable hardwoods, they die as they stand, and 
may expose their gaunt arms and grey trunks for up to half-a-century and 
even more, littering the pasture until such time as fungi, beetles, and tlie 
elements combine to reduce them again to mother earth. 

7. Destruction of Forests. 

The deliberate destruction has arisen from two causes — (1) the destruction 
of trees to convert them into timber ; and (2) the destruction of trees and 
shrubs in the formation or improvenrent of pastoral and arable land. 

In (1) the requirements of engineering and mining works, building, fencing, 
furniture, etc., have to be provided for. Under (2) the burning off has been 
incessant, but a fair percentage of dead timber has been converted into 
household fuel in the vicinity of towns. In Western Australia the cutting 
of green timber for fuel purposes in the vicinity of the gold-fields is, because 
of the local scarcity of coal, carried out to an extent unknown in eastern 



172 Federal Handbook. 



Australia. Since the removal of all large timber in the vicinity oi the gold- 
fields areas is complete, data should be obtainable in regard to the rate of 
growth of many species in definite areas, natural re-afforestation being usually 
allowed to proceed. In South Australia alone there are large forest planta- 
tions, this being largely a treeless State. Victoria and New South Wales 
are doing some planting. 

The compensating extent of natural re-afforestation is considerable, 
although sometimes lost sight of. Some species, e.g., Eucalyptus pilularis, 
Sm., re-afforest rapidly in forest land, and it is believed that the seeds of 
forest trees, which pass through sheep and cattle, and which are trampled 
into the soil, are responsible for the conversion of large areas of grass land 
into forest in the eastern States. 

The removal of the trees of a forest destroys the plant equilibrium, and 
interesting changes, which, however, cannot be discussed at this point, take 
place, particularly in the brush. 

8. Scrub and Brush. 

The term scrub has something of inferiority in its meaning, referring 
primarily to small or stunted vegetation, whether of trees or shrubs ; in 
Queensland, it has become applied to the luxuriant vegetation of the jungle. In 
New South Wales it is applied more generally to the comparatively sparse 
vegetation of the more sterile areas, such as those of the sandstone and 
granite. It is also applied to the open forest, in which the species are more 
gregarious as a rule than those of the brush. 

The Brush. — The brush corresponds to what in India is called jungle, 
and consist?! -^f well-watered rich-soil areas, chiefly in the coast belt and coast 
table- lands of eastern Australia, which support not only rich arboreal vege- 
tation, but also creepers and climbers of various kinds, and shrubby under- 
growth. The tree vegetation is of the most varied character {e.g., Meliaceae, 
Sapindacese, Saxifragacese, Cunoniacese, Lauraceae, Monimiaceae, Coniferse 
(Podocarpus), Taxacese {Araucaria and Callitris), but rarely includes Euca- 
lypts. The term brush is almost entirely confined to New South Wales 
and Queensland ; in New South Wales it is used largely ; in Queensland 
the term scrub is often substituted. 

In the brush forests of the northern coastal districts of New South Wales 
and coastal Queensland generally, the buttress-stem is often seen. Frequently 
these buttresses are of considerable size ; nearly vertical and quite thin, almost 
like stalls in a stable. They are commonly seen in Figs (Ficus), and also 
Yellow Carabeen {Sloanea Woollsii, F. v. M.), Booyong {Tarrietia argyro- 
dendron, Benth.), Red Cedar {Cedrela Toona), She Beech {Cryptocarya spp.), 
Marara ( Weinmannia Benthami. F. v. M.), and many others. Sometimes these 
buttresses extend in fantastic shapes along the ground and, in the case of the 
Yellow Carabeen, they may be so delicate as to be not more than an inch 
thick where they enter the ground. 

They form natural struts to the trees in areas of well-watered good soil 
and warm temperature, where the competition amongst tree individuals is 
very keen. Very long trunks run up towards the light and, even with their 
diminished crowns, the leverage of such long stems renders the buttress 
essential to the stability of the tree. 



AUSTRALTAN VEGETATION. 173 

Lianes are not unusual in the brushes, being generally the stems of a species 
of Vitis ; these contain water, and the bushman cuts them into lengths and 
more siio obtains drinking-water from them. They grow in the warmer 
coastal brushes, where the rainfall is good ; at the same time, running water 
may be as much as a few miles away. 

In moderately dry and very dry country the aborigines, and the white 
men on occasion, dig up the roots of certain trees, and obtain sufficient 
drinking water therefrom. The trees usually employed are certain Mallees 
or dwarf Eucalypts, particularly E. incrassata, Labill., var. dumosa, and 
E. oleosa, F. v. M., also Hakea leiccoptera, F. v. M. (one of the needle-bushes), 
Casuarina Decaisneana, F. v. M. (a Desert Oak). 

9. Natural Hybrids. 

Bentham (B. Fl.) wrote that little as we know of the influence of natural 
hybridism in Europe, it has been still less, if ever, observed in Australia. 

This statement is not as true to-day, as regards either Europe or Australia, 
as when it was written, and some observations are now available, particularly 
in connexion with Eucalyptus. Care must of course be taken that the 
attribution of natural hybridization is not a too hurried jumping to con- 
clusions without adequate evidence. 

The subject demands careful field knowledge, and it would appear that 
the phenomenon has already been proved, without reasonable doubt, in a 
number of cases, chiefly Eucalyptus, and attention is briefly drawn to the 
matter because of its very great importance. 

10. Use of the Term "Desert" in Australia. 

The underlying meaning of this word is absence of vegetation, and 
classical examples are those of the Sahara of North Africa, and the Gobi 
desert of Central Asia. 

In Central Australia there are extensive regions of low or intermittent 
rainfall, some of moving sandliills and, especially towards the centre and west, 
of saline depressions, but very much of the country referred to as desert 
in the old maps is not desert in the strict sense, since it sustains a more or 
less sparse vegetation, with trees here and there, while immediately after rain 
innumerable plants spring up, carpeting the country side with individuals 
of Gramineae, Compositge, {e.g., Helipterum, Helichrysum, etc., wliite, pink, 
yellow, and even other colours), Salsolaceae, Goodeniacese {e.g., Velleia rosea, 
S. le M. Moore, and Goodenia spp.), Amarantaceye (purple and pink Ptilotus), 
Cruciferse, etc. 

The truly riverless area is chiefly comprised in eastern Western Australia 
and the southern portion of the Northern Territory, while the Salt-lake 
system, in which a large number of rivers do not find their way to the coast, 
but terminate in Lake Eyre, is a considerable area a little east of the centre 
of the continent. 

These areas .support a most interesting xerophytic vegetation, and strips 
throughout the so-called desert are pastoral country, supporting both grass 
and edible shrubs. It is interesting to note how year by year the " wheat 
line " in all the mainland States has been pushed into the " desert," and 
man is getting remunerative crops from regions of low rainfall and light sandy 
soil which would have been looked upon as chimerical a decade ago. In 



174 Federal Handbook. 



other words, the " desert " land is shrinking year by year, and a factor to aid 
this shrinkage will be the Port Augusta-Kalgoorlie railway line, which will 
link Western Australia mth the eastern States. It is not possible, however, 
that any considerable number of visiting botanists can find time to study 
our " desert " on the spot, and the subject cannot be dealt with at all 
fully in this general article. 

The permanent plants of the arid country are dependent on subterranean 
water, the catchment and storage of some of these supplies being both very 
small and purely local. In addition to these local supplies, dependent on 
the very intermittent rainfall, there are the vast artesian accumulations, 
the relation of which to the vegetation they support will furnish the student 
with an interesting subject for investigation. In Western Australia local 
natural water supplies, very circumscribed in area, are known as " soaks," 
and frequently form oases around which there is a specially interesting 
vegetation. 

Vast areas of Australia have only, as regards the vegetation, two kinds 
of season, the dry and the rainy. The rainy season may be only a few days 
in the whole year, or, it may be, as it usually is, intercalated with dry 
periods. When these showers come, the surface of the ground is changed 
as if by magic, bright carpets of the small plants already referred to covering 
the ground with uniformity over large areas ; these quickly mature, develop 
seeds, and perish, being represented by the seeds alone, until the next period 
of their life-cycle arrives with a further supply of rain. In many of these 
regions of small and intermittent rainfall it is obvious that no recorders of 
rainfall are present, and the only practicable method a student has, is to 
arrange with some one living in the vicinity to notify him by telegraph of a 
local rainfall, in order that he may hasten to the spot without delay. 

Adaptation to Environment. — The adaptation to environment of desert 
plants in Australia, and particularly those of Western Australia, has been 
ably dealt with by Mr. S. le M. Moore, and doubtless our visitors will specially 
examine the characters of xerophilous plants in all parts of the continent 
conveniently accessible to them. Space only allows the briefest reference 
to the subject here. Henslow quotes Volkens as stating that certain xerophil- 
ous plants covered with a resinous substance, which prevents a too energetic 
transpiration, are peculiar to the Southern Hemisphere. Examples out of 
very many are Beyeria viscosa, Eucryphia Billardieri (Pinkwood of Tasmania), 
Dodonaea and Acacia of various species ; the roots of various Gramineae. 

The young shoots of Angophoras and of the Corymbosse section of Euca- 
lypts are protected by a covering which contains caoutchouc. 

The Blanket plants (Lachnostachys) of Western Australia are especially 
woolly, and so are the allied genera Newcastlia and Dicrastylis. Many 
Composites and Malvaceous plants are, with many others, very hirsute. 
These non-conducting coverings hinder the transpiration of moisture. 

Instances of aphylly are very numerous, and are afforded by such plants 
as — 

Native Cherry (Exocarpus), Cypress Pine {CalUtris), She Oaks 
(Casuarina), Apophyllum anomalum, Tetratheca juncea, Comes- 
perma of various species, Daviesia alata, Sphcerolobium vimineum, 
Viminaria denudata, Amperoea spartioides, and many others. 



Australian Vegetation. 175 

There are also many succulent plants belonging to the families Zygo- 
phylleae, Portulacacese, Ficoidese, Crassulaceae, Salsolacese, Euphorbiaceae 
{Euphorbia, &c.), Asclepiadacese {D(Bmia, Sarcostemma). 

Some plants have water-storing cells in stems or in roots, or in both. 
Notable examples are the Kurrajong {BmcJiy chiton populneus, R. Br.), widely 
distributed, and the Bottle Tree {B. Delabechii, F. v. M., or Sterculia rupestris, 
Benth.), found in Queensland, and so called from its ludicrous resemblance 
to a gigantic lemonade bottle. These are not only water bearing as regards 
their stems, but also have succulent roots, which are sometimes eaten by 
the aborigines. In North-western Australia the Gouty Stem [Adansonia 
Gregorii, F. v. M.) is to be found, a characteristic feature of the landscape, 
while a second species {A. Hanhuryana, Hochr.) has recently been described. 
Reference has already been made to the so-called water-bearing trees. 

II. Origin of the Australian Flora. 
(a) The Original Australian Element. 

Wallace observes that South-western Australia is the remnant of the 
more extensive and more isolated portion of the continent in which the 
peculiar Australian flora was principally developed. He suggests that the 
existence there of a very large area of granite (800 miles in length by nearly 
500 in maximum width, with detached masses 200 miles to the north and 500 
miles to the east), indicates such an extension ; for these granitic masses 
were certainly once bm*ied under piles of stratified rock, since denuded, 
and then formed the nucleus of the old Western Australian continent.* 

He further states that while this rich and peculiar flora was in process of 
formation, the eastern portion of the continent must either have been widely 
separated from the western, or had perhaps not yet risen from the ocean. 

In Cretaceous times and far into the Tertiary, there was no Australian 
continent in existence, but instead, a crescentic wide belt of sea forming 
an archipelago, consisting of two main islands to the north, one large island, 
and some smaller ones to the south, and another to the north-east.f 

The distribution of land and sea in the Cretaceous period is shown by 
Jensen, J based on David's maps, and during that period the Rolling Downs 
formations were laid down. The sea extended from Cape York from south 
to north of Queensland, extending over most of its area, except in the east, and 
covering a considerable portion of northern South Australia and north- 
western New South Wales. 

This later map differs fi'om Wallace's chiefly as regards his continuous 
eastern land area (almost the Torresian and Bassian sub-regions of Spencer, 
see below), and the deflection of Wallace's sea to the north-west. Jensen 
remarks that the Cretaceous sea was probably connected with the ocean, 
both to the south and to the north ; thus an aqueous barrier between west and 
east is understood, which is what Wallace postulated. 

Speaking of the disappearance of the Cretaceous basin, which caused a 
migration of the hardy plants {Eucalyptus, Proteacese, etc.), which had 
developed on the barren soils of Western Australia into eastern parts, where 

• " Island Life," 2n(l EU., 494. 

t See Wallace's map at p. 497, op. cil. 

t I'roc. U.S., Q., xxiii., Fiix. 9. 



176 Federal Handbook. 



they expelled and subdued the Indo-Malaysian type of flora, Jensen* points 
out that there is evidence that the plants they drove back were largely 
Lauracefc in the fossil leaves of the older deep leads and the trachytic tuffs 
of the Warrumbungles of New South Wales. 

Tate, in 1888,t divided the Australian endemic flora into three types — 

1. Euronotian, occupying the coastal area of the north-east and south- 

east, its internal boundary coinciding with the rainfall limit 
of 25-50 inches per annum. 

The type flora of this is dominant in the south and east 
part of the continent. 

2. Autochihonian, a small region restricted to the south-west corner 

of the continent, its internal boundary also coinciding with the 
same rainfall limit in this part. 

3. Eremian, occupying a large stretch of country, centering in Lake 

Eyre, but extending right across the continent to the shores 
of Western Australia and over which the average rainfall is over 
10 inches per annum. 
Besides this endemic flora, what he styles an " immigrant " flora has 
two constituents — 

(a) Oriental, dominant in the littoral tracts, but mixed there with 

typical Australian genera. 

(b) Andean, restricted for the most part to the highlands of New South 

Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania, and with this he includes north 
temperate forms, i.e., species characteristic of north temperate 
regions. 
Mr. C. HedleyJ pointed out that the regions suggested by Tate as suitable 
in the case of plants were not equally suitable in the case of animals. Accept- 
ing (1) and (2), he suggested that (3) should be di^dded into two, and suggests 
that for Tasmania, Victoria, and southern New South Wales the name 
Euronotian should be retained, whilst for the second portion of the division, 
including Queensland and northern New South Wales, he suggested the name 
Papuan. 

Baldwin Spencer (also on zoological grounds) modifies Tate's proposals, 
suggesting § a high Eyresian sub-region, including the greater part of the 
continent, with a Torresian (Papuan) sub-region, including Papua, North 
Australia, and eastern Queensland as far south as the Clarence River (near 
the Queensland New South Wales boundary), while his Bassian sub-region 
includes Tasmania, Victoria, and eastern New South Wales. 

To whatever extent some of Wallace's conclusions in regard to the relations 
of the Australian flora in the present and past epochs may have been 
defective, owing to the imperfection of our geological knowledge at the time, 
(and both Messrs. C. Hedley|| and S. le M. Moore^ have ably criticised them), 
the point of most importance is, as Professor Baldwin Spencer has pointed 
out, demonstration of the fact that for a long period of time the east and 
west parts of the continent were separated from each other by an 

• Op. cU., p. 189. 

t Proc. AuDt. Ausn. Adv. Sci., i. 312, &c. 
j Proc. Aust. Assoc. Adv. Sci., V. 444. 
§ Horn Exped. Rep. Pt. i., 197. 
II " Loc. cit.'' 
t " Natural Science," XV., 198 (1899). 



Australian Vegetation. 177 



impenetrable barrier of some description. The original division of the 
continent into a western and eastern half, the former containing the 
Autochthonian constituent, is generally admitted, and most authors agree 
that the separation took place in Cretaceous times. 

Tate says the Eremian flora was developed in Central Australia in Pliocene 
times from Autochthonian and Euronotian elements, and was largely modified 
by Oriental immigrants. 

Tertiary Flora. — von Ettingshausen recorded Eucalyptus and Metro- 
sideros in the Eocene beds of Sheppey, England, and Pimelea, Leptomeria, 
and four genera of Proteacese were recorded by Heer in the IMiocene of 
vSwitzerland. Fm-ther, Ettingshausen believed he found 55 Australian forms 
in the Eocene beds of Haring (? Belgium). Hooker wrote to Wallace that 
he considered these determinations worthless, and Bentham disapproves of 
similar identifications by Heer and Unger. Indeed it was for some time 
held that the European Tertiary flora contained Alnus, Betula, Quercus, 
Sequoia, Acer, Pinus, and other genera peculiar to the Northern Hemisphere, 
together with Casuarina, Grevillea, Banksia, Dryandra, Leptomeria, Eucalyp- 
tus, and other genera peculiar to the Southern Hemisphere. 

Turning to the Antipodes, Ettingshausen* records many European forms 
in the Tertiary of Australia, but Deane| firmly disputes the accuracy of 
certain of the determinations, wliile, referring to the European ones, Hemsleyf 
says that until more conclusive testimony is forthcoming of the former 
existence of Proteaceee, Eucaljrpti, etc., in Em'ope, we cannot avoid the 
conviction that they originated in the south. 

In the opinion of the most experienced botanists in Australia the botanical 
determinations and deductions built by some palaeo-botanists upon mere 
leaf impressions are to be regretted. Except in the case of very characteris- 
tic material, botanists who deal with the existing flora usually ask to be 
excused from determining a plant on a leaf only. 

(b) The Austro=Malayan (including Papuan) Element. 
Bentham§ observes that the predominant portion of om- vegetation 
appears to be strictly indigenous, and that the great mass of purely Australian 
species and endemic genera must have originated or been differentiated in 
Australia, and adds that it never spread far out of it. 

He also states that the only exceptions observed by him are a few Aus- 
tralian types {e.g.. Eucalypti, Epacrideae, phyllodineous Acacias, etc.) appear- 
ing in the Malayan Archipelago, especially Timor, New Guinea, and Borneo, 
where they have established distinct, though in most cases, nearly repre- 
sentative species, sometimes, however, preserving absolute identity, and a 
very few, chiefly annual or herbaceous plants of various Australian genera, 
found as far as South China, mostly in identical or very closely representative 
species. But little was known comparatively of the Chinese flora in Ben- 
tham's time, but thi'ough the publication of Forbes' and Hemsley's Enumera- 
tion and other works, we are now in a far better position to indicate the pre- 
cise relationships of the Australian and Chinese floras. The flora of the Malay 
Archipelago is also now much more readily available to students. And 

• " Contrib. Tertiary Flora of Aiistraliii," Mem. (Jeul. Snrv., N.S.W., I'al. No. 2. 

t Pror. Linn. Snc, N.S.W. XX,, (548 H xeq. 

X <:iiallonj?cr Reports, Botany Vol. I. (Hemsley's Introd., p. 51). 

§ Pref. to B. Fl., VII., p. vi. 

C. 121 54. M 



178 Federal Handbook. 



here it may be mentioned that there are two aspects of every mutual relation ; 
we require to accumulate additional data not only in regard to the incursions 
of the purely Australian element into regions beyond, but also in regard to 
the " foreign " element into Australia. A bridge carries passengers both 
ways. 

In another place Bentham* observes that the principal flora showing 
an ancient connexion between Australia and other countries is the Indo- 
Australian. A number of genera whose main station is in tropical Asia 
extend more or less into tropical or eastern sub-tropical Asia, sometimes in 
identical, sometimes in more or less difEerentiated species. Those of coastal 
Queensland have generally an east Asiatic character. A few Ceylonese and 
Indian types are more specially represented in Arnhem's Land, but scarcely 
any Indian forms are found westward of that peninsula. 

The whole of the islands east of Wallace's line, called the Austro-Malayan 
Region, essentially form part of a former Australian or Pacific continent, 
although some of them may never have been actually joined to it. These 
islands of com'se include Celebes, G-ilolo, Ceram, and Papua. A shallow sea 
(under 100 fathoms) at the present time connects Papua and northern Aus- 
tralia as far as the " north-west " on the one side, and Queensland on the 
other. 

Wallace remarks-j- that when we consider the wonderful dissimilarity of 
the two (Papuan and Australian) regions in all those physical conditions 
which were once supposed to determine the forms of life — Australia, with 
its open plains, stony deserts, dried-up rivers, and changeable temperate 
climate ; Papua, with its luxuriant forests, uniformly hot, moist, and ever- 
green — this great similarity in their productions is almost astounding, and 
unmistakably points to a common origin. In this passage he, however, 
omits to note the fact that northern Queensland, east of the Divide, may be 
described in terms precisely similar to those employed by him in regard to 
Papua. 

It is not difficult to understand how a migration of plants from Papua to 
northern Queensland (omitting for the moment reference to other parts of 
northern Australia further west) can have taken place via the land connexion 
or the stepping stones of Torres Straits, while the climatic conditions, although 
a little cooler in northern Queensland, at all events as compared with coastal 
Papua, are nearly similar in the two land areas. Then acclimatisation comes 
into play, and plants, having once bridged the gap, progress on their south- 
ward journey. 

The Austro-Malayan element is common in the coastal " scrubs " (brushes) 
of Queensland, and is marked even in the same formations in New South Wales, 
but the writer is not able to submit a useful statistical account of this 
element in Australia at the present moment. 

In 1892 above 2,000 species of Phanerogams were known from Papua. 
i.e., from the Dutch, English, and German possessions; in 1911, the number 
of species described must be nearly 3,000, chiefly through botanical activity 
in the German possessions. Dr. R. Schlechter alone has contributed nearly 

* Pref. to B. Fl., VII. 

t " Malay Archipelago," p. 580 (1886). 



Australian Vegjitation. 179 

100 terrestrial orchids, a coasiderable number of wliich are new, the others 
l)eing Malayan. 

The whole of Papua is a region of tropical forests only occasionally in- 
terrupted by savannas, i.e., grassland interspersed by trees. What Wallace 
says as regards Borneo, that an Orang-utang could cross the island from tree 
to tree, without putting foot to the ground, pretty well applies to Papua. 

The chief savannas are at the mouth of the Fly River, and the grasses 
are chiefly composed of Imperata arundinacea (our Blady Grass), and the 
genera Anihistiria {Themeda, our Kangaroo Grass), Rotthoellia, Andropogon, 
Apluda, Pennisetum, etc., all tall grasses ; while the interspersed groups of 
trees contain to a great extent the genera Eucalyptus {E. tereticornis, Sm., 
alba, Reinw., clavigera, A. Cunn., terminalis. F. v. M., and perhaps others) 
and other Myi'tacese, Acacia {A. Simsii, A. Cunn., A. holosericea, A. Cunn, 
and another), and Proteaceae. The character of the savannas on the Fly 
River is almost, or quite, identical with the character of York Peninsula, 
the northernmost point of which is only about 100 miles distant from the 
mouth of the Fly River, but this is the only part of Papua in which strong 
affinities to the flora of Australia are shown. It seems strange that the Aus- 
tralian flora has not taken greater possession of New Guinea, but it would 
appear that collections show that Australian plants are strangers in Papua, 
the types of the flora being South Asiatic, Australian plants being very 
scantily sprinkled in Papua with the single exception of the Fly River 
savannas. This statement is made with some reservation, on account of the 
incompleteness of the data. 

Prof. Warburg remarks that if Papua were connected with Australia 
through the York Peninsula at one time, which is very probable, it must 
have been before the time that Eucalyptus became such a prominent feature 
in the flora of Australia. At the same time. Eucalyptus is common in the 
savannas of the Fly River. 

By far the majority of the genera of Papuan plants are those of the 
Malayan Archipelago, those genera which have the most species in the eastern 
part of Malaya having the most species in Papua ; but it would be wrong to 
consider the flora of Papua identical with the flora of Malaya, the number of 
endemic genera and species being too great. 

Epiphytic Rhododendrons are common in high elevations in German 
Papua, connecting the flora with the Himalaya ; a Rhododendron is also 
found on the highest mountain in Queensland, the Bellenden-Ker Range. 
Prof. Warburg states that Rhododendrons, mostly beautifully large- 
flowered species, are common on the Papuan mountain ranges at high 
elevations, and that there are two Coniferae {Phyllocladus hypophylla and 
Libocedrus papuana) both closely allied with species he met in mountain 
regions of Borneo. These genera are also found in New Zealand, the former 
genus being found in Tasmania also. Several species of Quercus (Oak) are 
found in high mountain regions in Papua, connecting the flora with the 
Himalaya ; no Quercus has yet been found in Australia. 

As far as is known of the floras of Papua, New Zealand, and the Melanesian 
Islands, endomisni is greatest in Papua, though New Caledonia may be found 
to equal it when the flora is better known. 

M 2 



180 Federal Handbook. 



The following genera are recorded from the summit of the Bellenden-Ker 
(Queensland) Range : — 

Hibbertia (Dilleniacese) ; Melicope (Rutaceae) ; Leptospermum, Myrtus, 
Rhodamnia (Myrtacese) ; Pentapanax (Araliaceae) ; Scnevola 
(Groodeniacese) ; Agapetes (Vacciniacese) ; Trochocarpa, Dracro- 
phyllum (Epacridese) ; Rhododendron (Ericaceae) ; Orites (Pro- 
teacese). 

The only genera of special interest to the student of the Papuan flora are 
Agapetes and Rhododendron. Agapetes is closely allied to Vaccinium ; it 
contains about 30 species, chiefly from the southern Himalaya, and a small 
number from Fiji, Borneo, and Papua ; the two species from Papua 
have been found at high elevations on the Mount Owen Stanley Range. 
Rhododendron has been already alluded to. Dracophyllum is so far interesting 
in that it connects the Bellenden-Ker flora with the Antarctic ; the genus 
is common in the Antarctic Islands and Tasmania, while one species is found 
in New South Wales, in Lord Howe Island, in New Zealand, and New Cale- 
donia, being found chiefly in mountainous regions. It is not found in Papua, 
as far as the author knows, nor in Malaya and Asia. 

Bentham* remarks that an exchange has evidently taken place in plants 
not strictly maritime between north-eastern Australia and New Caledonia 
and other islands of the South Pacific, but not to any great extent. More 
Australian types appear to be represented in New Caledonia than New 
Caledonian ones in Australia. 

(c) The Antarctic Element (so called). 

Hooker,| following Forster, used the expression " Antarctic plants of 
Australia," which are not so called because they really inhabit the country 
of that name beyond the polar circle, but because, in a botanical point of 
view, no less in a position relative to the south temperate flora, they repre- 
sent the Arctic flora. He adds that they might indeed almost be called alpine 
plants, for many, which are found at the level of the sea in the so-called 
Antarctic islands, also ascend the mountains of more genial latitudes. 
BenthamJ then speaks of the connexion of the alpine flora of Tasmania, 
Victoria, and New South Wales with the general southern extra-tropical 
and mountain region, extending through New Zealand to the southern end 
of the American continent and thence up the Andes. Many of the Australian 
species of this type are identical with or closely representative of New Zealand 
ones, and some have a much wider range. He adds that it is probably 
through this conDexion that a few species belonging to the temperate or 
cooler floras of the northern hemisphere have evidently, in very remote 
times, become represented in Australia. 

Hooker noted the following genera as most characteristic of the Antarc- 
tic regions : — Colobanthus, Accena, Donatia, Nertera, Forstera, Leptinella 
(Cotula), Ourisia, Drapetes, Fagus, Oreobolus, Lomatia, Carpha. 

Hemsley§ discusses the Antarctic flora, and using the plants enumerated 
by Engler,|| adds very extensively to the list given by Hooker, and makes 
interesting deductions. 

* Pref. to B. Fl. VII. 

t " Introd. Essay to Flora of Tasmania," p. LXXXIX. 

t Pref. to B. Fl. VII. 

§ " Introd. to Rep. ou lusiUar Floras " (Challnqer Rep. Bot., I. 50). 

II Versuch einer Entwicklungs geschichte der Pflanzenwelt. 



Australian Vegetation. 181 

The tabular view of the distribution of the Phanerogams of the islands 
south of New Zealand by T. F. Cheeseman,* together with the notes on the 
affinities of the flora, are most suggestive. See also valuable botanical con- 
tributions by Dr. L. Cockayne, E. M. Laing, and D. Petrie in the same work, 
to which I can only invite the attention of workers in this condensed sketch. 

These Antarctic representatives are chiefly to be found in Tasmania ; 
the Tasmanian flora has a surprising number of plants in common with the 
flora of the Australian Alps of Victoria and New South Wales, but the genera 
represented in northern New South Wales {e.g., Fagus) and Queensland 
{e.g., a Dracophyllum on Mt. Bellender-Ker) are much fewer, as are also 
those of Kangaroo Island and South Australia. 

12. Affinities with the South African Flora. 

The flora of South Africa and Australia have a great many species in 
common, but hardly any that are confined to the two regions ; all, or nearly 
all, the species found in South Africa and in Australia are cosmopolitan 
plants, or plants of a wide geographical distribution, therefore without any 
value in regard to the development of the flora. Even the genera the two 
countries have in common are not numerous. Still there are many affinities 
between them, but the connexion that once probably existed, via the Ant- 
arctic, must have been separated so long ago that their common ancestors 
had time to develop into distinct species and genera. For instance : Aus- 
tralia has 34 genera of Proteacese, mostly endemic, but some are also found 
in New Zealand, New Caledonia, and Malaya. South Africa has eleven 
genera, mostly endemic. Not a single genus of Proteacese is common to Aus- 
tralia and South Africa. 

Hooker points out that by far the greater number of the known species 
of Proteaceae and Eestiaceae are confined to these two countries. Of our 
Australian Restiacese, the genera Restio, Leptocarpus, and Hypolcena are 
common to both. 

The enormous time that must have passed since the separation of the 
two floras by some geological changes is still better expressed by the Epacridese 
and Ericaceae. The common ancestors of the two families probably lived in 
both continents, and, as in Proteaceae, the descendants developed along 
different lines ; for some reason genera with anthers opening in terminal 
pores (Ericaceae) prevailed in South Africa, and genera with anthers opening 
in parallel slits prevailed in Australia (Epacrideae). The same characteristic 
goes through most families, though it is most pronounced in Proteaceae, 
Epacrideae, and Ericaceae. 

Benthamf discusses the connexions of the Australian and South African 
floras from the point of view of Compositae. 

Setting aside the cosmopolitan genera Senecio and Gnaphaliuin, the 
following genera are common to the two regions : — 

Brachycome. . . . 41 Australian, 1 South African sp. 



Helipterum 


. 53 




12 


Helichrysuni 


. 70 




137 


Gassinia 


. 13 




1 


Athrixia 


7 




6 


Cotula 


. 8 




22 



• " Siib-antarctlc IsIandR of New Zealand." oil. Dr. C. Chilton, Vol. 11., Systematic Botany, p. 389. 
t Journ. Linn. Soc. XIII., .5.'j2. 



182 Federal Handbook. 



Bolus and Woolley-Dod* remark that the following families, characteristic 
of Australian vegetation, abound most, after Australia, in South Africa, 
viz., Thymelacete, Hsemodoracese, Droseracese ; and another point of 
approach is found in the remarkable deficiency in both countries of the widely 
diffused families Rubiaceae, Lauracese, Aracese. 

Hooker, who first discussed the subject,")" ofiered the hypothesis of a common 
origin of the Australian and South West African flora, derived from ancestors 
inhabiting a vast Antarctic continent of which the greater part has been 
submerged. He thought Western Australia was connected with the Cape 
district by land at a time when it was severed fi'om eastern Australia. In 
this connexion, MoseleyJ asks how it is that marsupials are not found at the 
Cape, being nevertheless found in the Great Oolite in England ? It would 
seem necessary almost that they must have been present at the Cape and have 
died out, unless it is possible that Proteacese and Restiacese are very much 
older than marsupials, in which case they would have been very old indeed. 

13. The Australian Flora as a Whole. 

Australia has three grand types of flora — the brilliant inflorescences of 
the dry sandy plains of Western Australia ; the luxurious vegetation of 
eastern Queensland and New South Wales and the alpine plants of Tas- 
mania. South Australia, the north-west of Victoria, and the vast western 
plains of New South Wales and Queensland approximate to the botanical 
conditions of the western State. Many Tasmanian or allied plants extend 
to south-eastern Australia generally, viz., most of Victoria and the south- 
eastern portion of New South Wales, the flora of Victoria being intermediate 
in character. The rain forests of western Tasmania are unique, and on the 
mainland are most closely approached by those of the Cape Otway district 
of Victoria. 

Bentham remarks that maritime plants, ranging at least from the Mas- 
carene Islands to those of the Pacific, are also to be found on the Australian 
coasts, mostly in identical species, with the addition of a few representative 
ones. 

The following families are entirely confined to Australia or almost so, 
e.g., Tremandrese, Stackhousiaceae, CandoUeacese, Goodeniacese, Casuarinacese, 
Phillhydreae, together with the phyllodineous Acacias, which form an enormous 
majority of the genus, and Eucalyptus. 

It is sometimes stated that the Australian flora is of a primitive character, 
but Moore strongly asserts that this is the result of bias imparted by the 
zoological data. " In what respect, it may be asked, is the flora of Australia 
less highly specialized ? Are not most of the great natural orders 
strong constituents of it — trees, some of them of gigantic size, shrubs, 
undershrubs, and herbs, parasites and saprophj^tes, climbing and carnivorous 
species, flowers adapted to profit by the visits of insects, and sometimes 
provided with a complex mechanism to insure such profit — all these are met 
with in Australia. In addition, the adaptability to the dry climate is 
wonderful, and in this respect, taking into account the variety of ways in 
which the destructive effects of a scorching sun and parched soil are guarded 

• Trans. South Africa Philos. Soc, XIV., 229. 

t Op. cU., p. XCII. 

i " Notes by a Naturalist" (Challenger), Chap. VI 



Australian Vegetation. 183 

ao-ainst, the Australian flora is without a parallel the world over. And if 
these be not evidences of high specialization, it is difficult to know where 
one must look for such."* 

Eeference will first be made to some families of wide Australian distri- 
bution, each State then being discussed in turn, and its physical features 
briefly described, ^vith especial reference to the flora, and, finally, such families 
as are mainly represented in any particular State, will be enumerated under 
that State. 

The RuTACE.^ are widely diffused in Australia, extending from the coast 
to the interior. The family mostly consists of floriferous shrubs, very deco- 
rative for gardens, and also including a number of trees, belonging to Evodia, 
Acronychia, and allied genera, chiefly found in the brushes of New South 
Wales and Queensland. The genus Boronia now consists of 72 species, 
and 44 of them are Western Australian, most of them being peculiar to that 
State, New South Wales coming next with 25. Eriostemo)i, as defined by 
Mueller, includes such genera as Croivea, Phebaliwn, Asterolasia, and Micro- 
cybe, and most botanists do not follow him in this. In this larger grouping 
we have a second genus of 72 sjiecies, and no genus of Rutacese is more evenly 
diffused throughout the continent. The genera Nonatolepis, Chorilcena, 
Diflolcena are confined to Western Australia, while Brombya, Pagetia, 
Glycosmis, Murraya, Clausena, have not been found out of Queensland. 
Acradenia is purely Tasmanian. 

The STACKHOUSIACE.E form an almost entirely Australian family of herbs 
usually quite small, and with Stackhousia by far the most important genus. 
Twenty-two species have been described so far, well distributed throughout 
the States. 

Of the Rhamnace^, Alphitonia excelsa, Reiss., is a moderately abundant 
tree of the brushes of New South Wales and Queensland, with conspicu- 
ously pale undersides to the leaves and bluish black fruits with reddish-brown 
seeds embedded in a brown powdery substance, and a remarkable timber 
of a pale colour which, on exposure to the light, very gradually assumes a 
rich red tint. The really important genera are two, Pomaderris and Cryp- 
tandra, the latter including (according to Mueller) the genera Trymalium, 
Spyridium, and StenantJiemum. Bentham, however, disagrees with such 
inclusion. Pomaderris is more eastern than western, and the reverse is the 
case as regards Cryptandra ; the former is especially well developed in 
Victoria and New South Wales. 

Sapindace^ are fairly well developed in Australia, and almost every 
species is endemic. The genus Dodoiian (Hopbushes) occurs in every State, 
and extends from the coast to the interior. Most of the species are shrubs, 
and the Pinnatae section comprises many beautiful ones. The genera 
Atalaya, Aleclryon, Cupaniopsis, &c. {Cupania, Nepheliu7n), are chiefly 
trees of the coastal brushes of Queensland and New South Wales ; Alalaya 
hemiglauca, F. v. M., the Whitewood, is an important inland tree. 

The Legumixos^e stands at the head o£ Australian families, with 1,276 
species, and the number is steadily being added to. Tlie family iuchides a 
very large number of species with ornamental flowers, \vlii(-li make gay the 
Australian bush. 

• Spencer Moore, " Suggestions upon the origin of tiie Australian Flora." Nat. Sci. XV., 1899, p. 207. 



184 Federal Handbook. 



In tlie section Papilionace^ the genera Brachysema, Chorizema, Gastro- 
lohum, Isotropis, Burtonia, Jacksonia, Sphcerolobium, Latrohea, Eutaxia are 
practically Western Australian, as are mainly so many other genera. The 
genera Lamprolobiiiin, Tephrosia, Desmocliuni, Cajanus, Rhynchosia, Flemingia, 
belong to the other side of the continent. Not many trees are included in 
this section ; one of them is the gorgeous Erythrina vespertilio, Benth., the 
Batswing Coral, with beautiful crimson flowers and cuneate leaves, and which 
is found in the warmer parts of the continent. 

Of the section Csesalpinese the most important genus is Cassia (30 species), 
for the greater part yellow flowering, and mostly shrubs, an exception being 
the moderate-sized tree {C. Brewsteri, F. v. M.), which bears trusses of most 
beautiful colour varying from yellow to orange and red. Most of the species 
prefer the dry country, only a few being found on the coast. 

The section Mimoseae is almost entirely taken up with the genus Acacia, 
by far the largest genus in Australia, 412 species having been described to 
date. It is divided into two grand sections, the Phyllodiuese, the leaves mostly 
phyllodinous without leaflets, and the Bipinnatse, with bipinnate leaves. 
The latter section has under 30 species, about 380 thus falling into the 
Phyllodineae, which is almost entirely Australian, a few other species belonging 
to this section occurring in India, Malaysia, and the Pacific Islands. 

Acacias are universally known in Australia as Wattle, or prefaced by 
adjectives, such as Silver, Golden, Black, Green ; they also bear such names 
as Myall, Boree, Mulga, Brigalow, Cooba, Dead Finish, Gidgee, Hickory, 
Umbrella Bush, Wait-a-while and Yarran, some of which are distinctive 
for species. The wattle has been adopted as the unofficial floral emblem 
of Australia ; it is represented on the national coat of arms and on postal 
notes ; will be on postage stamps, and is used for decorative purposes in 
a variety of ways. The genus is found in every State, from the coast to 
the arid interior, in swamps i:,nd on the dry sides of mountains, by the 
banks of rivers, and on the dry plains. They vary in size from 3 or 4 
inches in height; most are shrubs of a few feet, while many are small trees, 
and some may be trees of great size, i.e., 100 or 1.50 feet. Some are of 
economic importance for tan-bark or timber. 

The family Halorrhagide^ is mainly represented by the genus Haloragis, 
which is chiefly Australian, but a few species are also found in New Zealand, 
in eastern Asia, in South Africa, and extra-tropical South America. There 
are 36 Australian species, and Bentham states that one species extends to 
New Zealand and the island of Juan Fernandez, 2 to New Zealand and eastern 
Asia, 1 to New Zealand only, the remaining 32 being endemic. They are 
mostly herbs and small shrubs with not showy flowers. 

The Myrtace^ come second in point of number of species, 816 having 
been described so far ; the family includes two very large genera. Eucalyptus, 
with 230 species, and Melaleuca, with 112. These belong to the tribe Lep- 
tospermae (capsular, and entirely or chiefly Australian). The tribe Chamse- 
lauciae has a dry, indehiscent one-seeded fruit, while the third tribe, the 
Myiteae, has an indehiscent berry or drupe. The vast majority of plants 
belonging to the family are worthy of cultivation on account of the beauty 
of their flowers, or of the neatness of the foliage or the shapeliness of the tree 
or shrub, or for their timber or essential oil. 



Australian Vegetation. 185 

Tribe ChamoBlaucieoB. — It is of course quite impossible to be more than 
exceedingly brief with such an all-pervading family. Darmnia, Calycothrix 
(Fringed M}Ttle), Verticordia, and Lhotzhja are almost exclusively Western 
Australian, though the first two are represented by very numerous individuals 
which extend to the eastern States. Thryptomene, though predominantly 
western, is more widely diffused in the other States than the remaining 
genera. All are shrubs. Chamcelaiccimn uncinatum, Schau., the " Gerald- 
ton Wax-flower," of Western Australia, is a shrub with large per.sistent pink 
flowers, and is one of the best shrubs ever introduced into cultivation. 

Tribe LeptospermoB. — The genus Bceckia is mostly Western Australian, 
the sections Oxymyrrhine and Babingtonia exclusively so. In New South 
Wales this genus is much less frequently met with, and particularly so as the 
Queensland and Victorian borders are approached. Hypocalymrna, Calo- 
thamnus, and Eremcea are exclusively western, and Beaufortia just extends 
to the Northern Territory. Agonis is western, with two eastern species. 
The important genera Leptospermum, Kunzea, and Melaleuca (all called Tea- 
trees, though often shrubs) are well diffused throughout the Itates, and 
Callistemon (one of the groups of plants called Bottle-brushes) is mainlv 
eastern. The genus Eucalyptus will be referred to separately. The important 
genera Tristania (Brush Box), Syncarpia (Turpentine), Bachhousia are 
notable if only from the fact that they are exclusively eastern, and mostly 
denizens of the brushes. 

The genus Eucalyptus, which comprises about 230 species, comes 
second only to Acacia in point of number amongst Australian genera, but it 
is so widespread and so abundant, that it is doubtless the most numerous 
in individuals of any. It is easily recognised by the operculum of the 
flower-bud. 

The vast majority of flowers of Eucalyptus have white or cream-coloured 
flJaments ; those with very showy crimson or scarlet or yellow filaments 
are mostly entirely confined to western and tropical Australia. In eastern 
Australia E. sideroxylon, A. Cunn., an Ironbark, very commonly has indi- 
vidual trees with pink or crimson filaments, while in a number of species 
such variation in coloration has also been observed but only rarely. In 
Western Australia there are E. erytkrocorys, F. v. M., and E. Preissiana, 
Schauer, with bright yellow filaments, and E. ficifolia, F. v. M., E. macro- 
carpa, Hook., E. pyriformis, Turcz., E. phoenicea, F. v. M., and a few others 
have beautiful red filaments, while those of E. miniata, A. Cunn., are orange- 
coloured. 

The formation of adventitious shoots or '" suckers," as they are invariably 
called in Australia, is well known to most people in Europe because of the 
difference in their appearance and that of the normal foliage. In Australian 
forests the phenomenon is forced upon the average man to an extent quite 
unknown in Europe, partly because there is so much primaeval forest, partly 
because the extensive destruction of forest for arable or pastoral land is a 
matter of every-day occurrence, and partly because the contrast between 
sucker-leaves and normal-leaves is, as a very general rule, greater than it is 
in Europe. 

These suckers are the curse of the pastoralist, who destroys the trees by 
ringbarking, to be followed by clearing or not, and who, as a rule, treats every 



186 Federal Handbook. 



species of Eucalyptus (the predominant arboreal vegetation) indiscriminately, 
and without regard for the season of the year. This empiricism often results 
in vigorous second growths. Of late years, some attention has been given, 
by the most intelligent land-owners, to physiological principles, the ringing 
being done when the tree is in full flush of leaves or in flower. The poisoning 
of trees by treating the rung surface by arsenic is being experimented upon 
in different parts of Australia. 

The barks of Eucalyptus trees vary greatly, but, being so easily seen from 
a distance, afford a ready diagnostic aid to classification of groups and even 
determination of species. The variation being so very great, these field 
observations require care in application. The usual or most elementary 
kind of bark is the smooth one, called the " Gum," and more or less glaucous, 
and more or less thick ; we find this bark from the sandy coastal flats to the 
bleak swamps and mountain areas and away to the arid interior, e.g., White 
Gum (E. hcBmastoma, Sm.), Eed gum [E. rostrata, Schlecht.). In the interior 
this is the prevalent kind of bark, with more or less (generally not very much) 
blackish or hard scaly or flaky-fibrous bark at the butt. Often the roughness 
is mere bulls' wool. Barks with smooth surfaces {e.g., Grey Gum, E. punctata, 
DC, E. tereticornis, Sm.), however, exfoliate, usually in patches, and the newly 
exposed surface later on becomes harder, and exfoliates in its turn. Thus 
there is constant renewal of the bark of a smooth tree always in progress. 
In this way the bark grows and provides for the gradually increasing diameter 
of the stem. In some cases the patches are long and the older bark contains 
more fibre, with sufiicient tenacity to form long ribbons {e.g., Eibbony Gums, 
E. viminalis, Labill). These are commonly found in the cooler tablelands 
of the southern and eastern States, and, when rendered supple by the rain 
and blown about by a strong wind, they stand out like the arms of a sema- 
phore. 

There is also that form of bark which is scaly all over the trunk, a form 
usually associated with the so-called Bloodwoods, e.g., E. corymbosa, Sm. 
(heavy red-kino producers), which are usually found in sterile sandstone 
areas from the coast to the interior. 

The bark may develop along two directions, one, such as is found in the 
Stringybark, which has a thick fibrous covering, with the fibres set longi- 
tudinally ; the other, as in the case of the Box or Apple-bark, in which the 
fibre may be more compact or felted {e.g., E. hemiphloia, F. v. M., E. 
Stuartiana, F. v. M.). If the fibrous bark be thinner and looser, it is often 
termed Peppermint {e.g., E. piperita, Sm., E. amygdalina, Labill.), and here 
there are transitions on the other hand, to the Ribbony Gums. 

Then there is a very hard furrowed bark, often black from age, known 
as Ironbark, the evolution of which Augustus Oldfield many years ago 
attributed to the longitudinal cracking of the bark accompanied by the 
matting caused by the discharge of a large amount of astringent exuda- 
tion. 

Amongst the types briefly defined there are all sorts of intermediate 
forms. Nor is the nomenclature of the different kinds of trees uniform ; 
for example, the term Box, arising primarily from a tough interlocked timber, 
is often applied to a timber of such a class, irrespective as to whether it has 
the E. hemiphloia, F. v. M. (the original Australian Box), type of bark. It 



Australian Vegetation. 187 



may have an almost ribbony bark. Very few barks are entirely smooth, 
and these are inclined to be thick and juicy ; the character of the bark is 
probably a protective adaption against bush-fires. As the tropics are 
approached, the tendency of all Eucalypts is to have a smooth bark, or with 
a little scaly bark at the butt. 

The timbers as regards colour may be roughly divided into red, brown, 
and pale. Red timbers may be found both in the interior {e.g., E. rostrata, 
Schlecht., E. microtheca, F. v. M., E. salmonopMoia, F. v. M.), or in the com- 
paratively well-watered coastal districts {E. marginata, Sm., E. resinifera, 
Sm., E. saligna, Sm.) ; but in the dry districts of eastern Western Australia 
the timber is nearly always cigar-brown in colour. The pale timber {e.g., 
E. pilularis, Sm., E. niicrocorys, F. v. M., E. gomphocephala, DC.) is mainly 
found in well-watered districts. 

Most timbers are more or less interlocked, the Ironbarks affording an 
extreme case, but a few are fissile, of which the G-ippsland Mountain Ash 
{E. regnans, F. v. M.) is a type. 

Mallee is the term formerly employed to denote shrubby Eucalypts 
with a thickened root-stock from which many stems spring ; the term now 
often includes species without the thickened root-stock. Marlock is the 
Western Australian equivalent to Mallee, and includes all gum scrub 
on a sand-plain. Gum scrub species never (or very exceptionally) attain 
the dignity of a tree from which timber may be cut. 

E. rostrata, Schlecht., is probably the most widely diffused of all species. 
It is moisture-loving, and follows the course of streams, or may be 
found in depressions in which, on the rare occasions on which rain does 
fall, it may find its way to the subjacent strata. 

Tribe MyrtecB. — This group is entirely eastern, and with one solitary 
exception {Eicgenia Smithii, Poir.. the " Lilly Pilly "), which extends to 
Victoria, belongs to New South Wales and Queensland, and chiefly to the 
latter. With hardly an exception, the whole tribe is found in brushes, 
and the members of it usually go by the name of Myrtles, very much oftener 
than the remainder of the Myrtaceae. Eugenia is by far the most important 
genus, and it includes a number of medium-sized or large trees, often planted 
for ornament, on account of their symmetry, the dainty colouring of their 
young foliage, the beauty of their abundant fruit, and the neatness of their 
(usually) white flowers. Myrtus is a beautiful and important genus of 
shrubs and trees, belonging even more to Queensland than to New South 
Wales. Rhodomyrtus is of less importance, while the handsome Barring- 
tonias are mainly tropical. 

Umbellifer.5; form a valuable constituent of the vegetation of Aus- 
tralia. Hydrocotyle is tlie largest genus (32 species), and all are endemic 
but two ; it is widely diffused, but mainly Western Australian. Didiscus 
(26 species) is exclusively Australian and well diffused throughout the States. 
Trachymene {Siebera) is practically endemic, and has 30 Australian species, 
mainly western, but with a noticeable eastern (New South Wales and Queens- 
land) representation. Xantho.sia is an endemic genus of not specially orna- 
mental herbs, mainly, but by no means exclusively, occuriing in Western 
Australia. Arfinotus is also endemic ; New South Wales has 5, Western 
Australia 4, and Tasmania 3 species. A. Heliantln, Labill.. is the well-known 



188 Federal Handbook. 



" Flannel Flower " of New South Wales, and A. rotundifolia, DC, the 
" Southern Cross " of Western Australia. 

The CoMPosiT.^ take the fourth place in the flora of Australia, with 
635 species. In the Flora Australiensis, Bentham gave the number at nearly 
500, arranged under 88 genera, 39 (of which 18 were then monotypic) being 
endemic to Australia. I compute that there are at present 101 indigenous 
genera, 56 of which are endemic, and of these 25 monotypic. 

The principal genera are Aster, 71 species ; Helichrysum, 70 ; Helipterum, 
54: ; Brachycome, 41 ; Calotis, 18 ; Podolepis, 17 ; Angianthus, 25; Gnephosis, 
18 ; Senecio, 30. 

It is not surprising, considering the facility {e.g., by means of pappuses), 
with which so many species are distributed, that there is less local distribu- 
tion of Composites than in any other large family. 

Some species, e.g., Helichrysum, Helipterum, Waitzia, Cephalipterum 
are cultivated as " Everlastings " ; others, e.g., Aster, Humea, Ammobium, 
Senecio, Brachycome, are herbs and shrubs capable of adorning the garden ; 
while some are mere weeds. 

The GooDENiACE^ are almost entirely Australian. The family contains 
here 294 species, divided into Goodenia, 112 ; Sccevola, 68 ; Dampiera, 54 ; 
LeschenauUia, 22 ; Velleia, 19 ; and representatives are to be found nearly 
all over the continent, Goodenia being most widely diffused. Sccevola is found 
to a comparatively small extent near the coasts of other continents. The 
family is remarkable for a cup-shaped or two lipped dilatation at the top, 
called the indusium, and which encloses the stigma. The colour of the 
flowers of Goodenia and Velleia are yellow, Sccevola generally purple, Dam- 
piera blue, and LeschenauUia, the most brilliant blue it is possible to imagine, 
and because of the profusion of the flowers, a sight of LeschenauUia country 
in the spring is a memorable recollection. 

Goodenia is, by majority, Western Australian (48), but there is a strong 
South Australian element (25), while Victoria has 10 species. Queensland 
(18) and Northern Australia (21) are even better represented. The genus 
has 16 species in New South Wales, nor is it absent from Tasmania (6). 
Sccevola is mainly Western Australian, with a good sprinkling in the other 
States, and the same may be said of Dampiera. Leschoiaultia is the heritage 
of the western State, no Western Australian representatives being found in 
the other States ; two species are found in South Australia, one is found 
in Northern Australia, Queensland, and New South Wales, and two others in 
Northern Australia, of which one belongs also to Queensland. 

The Ericace^ are but poorly represented, three species of Gaidtheria 
being found in Tasmania, one of which extends to Victoria and New South 
Wales, while a Pernettya and a Wittsteinia occur in Tasmania and Victoria 
respectively. A Rhododendron and an Agapetes occur on the summit of 
Mount Bellenden-Ker, in Queensland. 

But we have our compensation in the profusion of Epacridace.e, both 
as regards species (301) and individuals. The two grand divisions into 
Styphelieae, with indehiscent, usually drupaceous fruit, and the Epacrese, 
with loculicidally dehiscent capsule, are sharply defined. Taking the genus- 
Styphelia, it is a question of one large genus (193 species at present) or a 
number of genera as defined by Robert Brown and others, and approved 



Australian Vegetation. 189 

by Bentham. It is admitted at once that these are species with intermediate 
characters, but the genera or sub-genera, to which I have referred, have 
mostly such characteristic facies that it seems regrettable to abandon them. 
The position is admirably summed up by Bentham in the Flora Australiensis, 
v., 145, and most field botanists will agree with him. 

The genus Leucopogon, readily known by its small white flowers with 
bearded corolla lobes, has 133 species, and it is almost exclusively Australian. 
Most of the species are Western Australian, New South Wales coming next 
in order of number, but the genus is represented in all the States. The mono- 
typic genera Needhamia and Oligarrhena are Western Australian, as are also 
the small genera Coleanthera and Conostephium, while Melichrus is east 
Australian. 

The original genus Styphelia (" Five Corners ") has eleven species, chiefly 
New South Wales and then Western Australian, while Astroloma is mainly 
Western Australian, with three species that extend to New South Wales. 
Space does not permit detailed reference to the remaining genera, except to 
say that when in fruit many of the shrubs look very beautiful, and that 
Tasmania is the State in which to see them at their best. Some of the 
Stypheliese in flower are very pretty. 

The beauty of the section Epacreae rests mainly in its flowers, and the 
genus Epacris (30 species) stands out pre-eminent in that respect. The genus 
is mostly east Australian, New South Wales having 19 species, although 
those of Tasmania and Victoria are glorious. Then there are the orna- 
mental genera Andersonia (20 species) and Sphenotoma (6), both peculiar to 
Western Australia and allied to Sprengelia. The genera Richea (8) and 
Dracophyllum (4) are herbs or small shrubs with a monocotyledonous aspect, 
as pointed out by Bentham. They are mostly Tasmanian, and the genus 
Richea is there known as " Grass-tree." R. Gunnii, Hook., extends to the 
Australian Alps of Victoria and New South Wales. DracophyUum is smaller 
(the giant D. Fitzgeraldi, F. v. M., occurs in Lord Howe Island) ; two species 
are Tasmanian, and New South Wales and Queensland have one each. 

The SoLANACE^ are chiefly represented in Australia by the genera 
Solanum (.56 species), Anthocercis, 18 ; while the principal masticatory of the 
aborigines is Duboisia Hopwoodii, F. v. M., a shrub found only in the interior ; 
there are three other species, two belonging to the brushes of the east coast. 
The genus Solanum is best developed in New South Wales and Queensland, 
but South Australia is well represented, and Western Australia only a little 
less. Anthocercis is endemic and differs only from Duboisia in having a 
capsular fruit. The genus is mainly Western Australian, but has many 
representatives in New South Wales and Victoria. 

The Myoporace^ form an almost entirely Australian family, the geims 
Myoporum being represented only to a small extent in the Indian Archi- 
pelago and the Pacific Islands, and by one species in tropical Africa. One 
Australian species {M. lenuifolium, G. Forst.) extends to New Caledonia. 
There are in all fifteen species, and they are well distributed throughout 
the States, M. platycarpum, R. Br., the " Sugar Tree," which often 
exudes a saccharine substance, being a well-known tree of the interior. 

But the glory of the family is the genus Eremophila (including Pholidia), 
of which there are no less than 91 species. They are mainly Western and 



190 Federal Handbook. 



South Australian, with a very strong New South Wales contingent. From 
the other States (except Tasmania) they are by no means absent. They are 
essentially dry country species, and are mostly of an ornamental character, 
bearing a profusion of flowers, varied and dainty in tint, but the colour is 
unfortunately lost in drying. They are shrubs varying in size. 

The Verbenace^ will be found very interesting. The whole of the 
genera of the Chloanthefe are endemic. Of the other sections the Lantana 
{L. Camara, L.) is an introduced species, and its aggressiveness has caused 
great devastation in eastern New South Wales and Queensland. Gmelina 
has three species, and includes G. Leichhardtii, F. v. M., a beautiful tree of 
the brushes of New South Wales and Queensland, which yields the especially 
valuf.ble timber known as " Native Beech." Avicennia officinalis, L., widely 
distributed in other parts of the world, is known here as "White Mangrove," 
and encircles the Australian coast ; it is absent from Tasmania. 

Of the endemic genera, Lachnostachys is confined to Western Australia, 
and its nine species are more or less densely hairy, which has obtained for 
them the name of " Blanket Plants." Neivcastlia is also a woolly genus 
with six Western and five South Australian species. Physopsis and Mallo- 
phora are closely allied genera, alike woolly and western. Dicrastylis is an 
allied genus of six Western and five South Australian species, and two have 
recently been described from Queensland. 

The most important genus is Chloanthes (including Pityrodia, the amal- 
gamation of which is not concurred in by all botanists), which now comprise 
26 species almost exclusively Western Australian, only one extending to 
Victoria, 2 to New South Wales, 2 to Queensland, and 4 to northern Aus- 
tralia. Hemifhora and Denisonia are monotypic, the former from Western 
and the latter from Northern Australia. Cyanostegia has two species from 
Western and one from Northern Australia. 

Of the Labiate, the genera of the well-marked tribe Prostantherete are 
alone endemic of the five genera which compose it. Prostanthera is by far 
the most important (.50 species), followed by Hemigenia (including Hemi- 
andra), 37 ; Microcorys, 16 ; and Westringia, 10. As regards Prostanthera, 
the preponderance of species (33) is in New South Wales, but there is a strong 
Victorian and South Australian element, only seven species occurring in 
Western Australia. With the prevailing colour of the flowers purple or 
purplish, some of the species are singularly floriferous and beautiful, and would 
adorn any garden. The lovely P. Sieberi, Benth., of eastern New South 
Wales, and P. lasianthos, Labill., " Mint Bush," a tall shrub which lines 
water-courses in most of the States, may be cited. 

Hemigenia is mainly Western Australian, though New South Wales 
and Queensland each have two species. Microcorys is Western Australian 
except as regards one species, which spreads into South Australia. West- 
ringia is more evenly distributed. Western and South Australia each having 3 
species ; Tasmania, 4 ; Queensland, 5 ; Victoria and New South Wales, 6. 

The family Chenopodiace^ is so widely diffused, and of such high 
economic importance to pastoralists, that we are apt to look upon it as more 
Australian than it really is. Some of the principal genera are not endemic 
in Australia, e.g., Chenopodium, Atriplex, Kochia, but they are richly repre- 
sented by endemic species, while the number of individuals is legion, "' Salt 



Australian Vegetation. 191 



bush " being tbe cbaracteristic vegetation of enormous areas. While the 
genera are well distributed throughout the States, thej are indicative of 
salinity, and are most commonly found in regions of low rainfall or in proximity 
to the sea. Atriplex is represented by 32 species ; Rhagodia, 13 ; Chenopo- 
dium, 11 ; Kochia (Cotton-bush), 30 ; Bassia, 37. 

The genus Philotus {Trichinium) is an extensive and purely Australian 
genus (76 species) of Amarantace^, usually, but not exclusively, occurring 
in regions of low rainfall. The flowers are in dense cylindroid spikes, usually 
pink, purple, or yellowish, and often known as " Silky-heads." The indi- 
viduals are often gregarious, covering large areas with a bright colouring. 

The Proteace^ form the third in order of abundance of species in Aus- 
tralia, having 667 distributed over 34 genera, some of the principal being 
Grevillea (193), HaJcea (107), Persoonia (62), Dryandra (49), Banhsia (48). 
Australia is the cliief seat of the family, although it is well represented in 
South Africa. Every tribe is represented in Australia. 

The distribution of the species within the States is as follows : — Western 
Australia is far ahead of any other State with 431 ; then follow in order 
New South Wales, 137 ; Queensland, 96 ; Victoria, 58 ; South Australia, 
41 ; North Australia, 36 ; Tasmania, 23. 

Very few genera do not occur in Western Australia, while Adenanthos, 
Simsia, Synaphia, and Dryandra are found there alone ; the monotypic 
genera Bellendena, Agastachys, and Cenarrhenes are confined to Tasmania ; 
Symplionema occurs only in New South Wales ; the inonot}^ic genera 
Roupala, Musgravia, Carnarvonia, Buchinghamia, DarUngia, Cardwellia in 
Queensland, together with Hollandicea (two species). Hicksbeachia, Helicia, 
Macadamia, Strangea, Stenocarpus, Emhothrium are confined to the brushes 
of New South Wales and Queensland. 

The genera Isopogon. Persoonia, Grevillea, Hakea, Banhsia occur in every 
State, while Grevillea and Persoonia are the only genera in which any State 
has more species than Western Australia ; the numbers being Grevillea— 
New South Wales, 77 ; Western Australia, 70 ; and Persoonia — New South 
Wales, 32 ; and Western Australia, 25. Lamhertia shows the peculiar 
distribution of Western Australia, 7 ; and New South Wales, 1. 

The copious woodiness of the follicle is observed in many genera of Pro- 
teacese, e.g., Hakea and Xylomelum ; in the latter genus it is so pronounced 
as to earn for it the name of " Wooden Pear " ; this protection to the seeds 
is doubtless a protective adaption in view of the frequent burning off which 
falls to the lot of Proteaceous shrubs. 

It is only in the brushes of New South Wales and Queensland that the 
Proteacese attain their largest development, Macadamia ternijolia, F. v. M. 
(yielding an excellent edible nut) ; Oriies excelsa, R. Br., and Grevillea robusta, 
A. Cunn. (both '' Silky Oaks ") ; Stenocarpus sinuatus, Endl. (the " Fire- 
tree ") and *S'. salignus, R. Br. (Red Silky Oak) ; Embothriuni Wickhami, 
Hill and F. v. M. ; Buckinghamia celsissima, F. v. M., Cardwellia subliniis, 
F. V. M., and a few others attaining the magnitude of first-class trees. 

Hundreds of species of Proteace;o are well worthy of cultivation. Amongst 
the very great number of beautiful shrubs, the gorgeous Telopea speciosissima, 
R. Br"., or " Waratah," stands pro-eminent. Of the trees, Grevillea robusta, 
A. Cunn., and Stenocarpus sinuatus, Endl., are, perhaps, oftenest seen in 



192 Federal Handbook. 



gardens, but there is a wonderful and beautiful collection to choose from. 
Many of the slirubs have charming " cut leaved " foliage, and are worthy 
of attention for that characteristic alone. Many of the Banksias (" Bottle- 
brushes ") and Dryandras are delightful plants, often bizarre. In Western 
Australia some species of Conospermum, e.g., C. sicechadis, Endl., and C. 
flonhundum, Benth. (Dwarf Smoke Bush), have such a copious tomentose 
white or greyish inflorescence as to give the appearance of smoking bushes, 
and in some districts they are in such abundance, to the local exclusion of 
almost every herbage, as to remind one of a heavy snow-fall, just thawing 
so as to show a little of the other herbage. 

The Thymelace^ are almost exclusively represented by the Australian 
genus Pimelea, of which we have 76 species, fairly well distributed throughout 
the States, with the exception of the sections Heterolcena and Calyptrostegia 
(sub section Ccilyptridiuni), which are all confined to Western Australia. 
They are usually small plants and not particularly ornamental, but some may 
be classed as such, expecially the showy Queensland P. hcematostachya, 
F. v. M. The bark of all is fibrous and very tough, and that obtained from 
the larger species was formerly used by the aborigines for making their 
little bags. 

Turning to the Santalace^, Exocarpus includes the "Native Cherry," 
which has won so much renown through having " the stone outside the 
fruit," E. cupressiformis, Labill., being the best known. The genus is widely 
distributed throughout Australia. It is root-parasitic like so many of its 
congeners, the family in this respect, as well as in floral characters, showing 
close affinity to the Loranthaceae. Leptomeria (" Native Currant ") and 
Choretrum are genera of erect leafless shrubs, the former more western and 
the latter more eastern in its distribution. The genus of most economic 
importance is Santalum, and includes species which furnish the Sandalwood 
of India and Polynesia. S. cygnorum, Mq., is the small tree which yields 
the Sandalwood of Western Australia, which has hitherto defied all attempts 
at reproduction on a commercial scale. It is in such demand that it is 
pulled up by the roots wherever seen, and visitors will observe pale- 
coloured, irregularly-shaped stems of it a few inches in diameter on trucks on 
the railways and on the wharf at Fremantle, for export to Singapore. The 
well-known Quandong is Fusanus acuminatus, R. Br. Both genera extend 
to eastern Australia, but they are essentially plants of low rainfall. 

The Casuarinace^, universally known as Oaks or She-oaks in Australia, 
consists of 29 species. Thirteen of them are confined to Western Australia, 
some are widely diffused, while a few are mostly eastern. Some are shrubs ; 
in the dry country there are trees of medium size ; in eastern Australia some 
species become very large. They occur in the desert, in dry rocky country, 
in saline soils both near the coast and inland, and the largest trees. River 
Oak (C. Cunninghamiana, Miq.), mark the courses of our eastern rivers. 

The family Taxace^ has five genera, Podocarpus (Nageia), Pherosphcera, 
Microcachrys, Dacrydium, and Phyllocladus. This family chiefly occurs in 
Tasmania, the Australian representatives of the genera Microcachrys, 
Dacrydium, and Phyllocladus being confined to that State. M. tetragona, 
Hook, f., is a small creeping wiry shrub, confined to mountain-tops ; D. 
FranUinii, Hook, f., a tall tree known as the " Huon Pine," found in the 



Australian Vegetation. 193 

south-west, and P. rhomhoidalis, Rich., the " Celery Top Pine," is common 
on mountains chiefly to the south and west (of Tasmania). 

The genus PhcBrophcera has two species, both shrubs, P. Hookerianu, 
Archer, found in Tasmania on the tops of mountains, and P. Fitzgeraldi, 
F. V. M., in a few localities in the higher parts of the Blue Mountains, New 
South Wales. 

The genus Podocarpus, called " Damsons " by the boys because of the 
enlarged succulent peduncle, comprises six species found in Australia, although 
the genus also occurs in South America and Eastern Asia. Five of our 
species are endemic, while one extends to Malaya. P. elata, R. Br., is the 
" She or Brown Pine," a large tree of New South Wales and Queensland, 
and P. Ladei, Bail., the so-called "Mt. Sturgeon Black Pine," is also a large 
tree, and occurs in northern Queensland. P. spitmlosa, R. Br., is a bulky 
shrub of eastern New South Wales, and P. alpina, R. Br., is a straggling 
appressed shrub found on mountain tops in Tasmania and the Australian 
Alps. P. Droicyniana, F. v. M., is the only species found in Western Aus- 
tralia ; it grows in the south-west, and is looked upon as an indication of poor 
sandy land. It grows in dense clumps 3 ft. 6 in. in diameter, and bears the 
local name of " Emu-berry." 

Of the family Pinace^ there are two handsome Kauri Pines, Agathis 
(Dammara) robusta, C. Moore, and A. Palmerstoni, F. v. M., both peculiar 
to coastal Queensland. The genus Araucaria has also two fine commercial 
trees, viz., A. Cunninghamii, Ait., the " Hoop or White Pine," of the brush 
forests of northern New South Wales and Queensland, and A. Bidwilli, Hook, f ., 
the " Bunya Bunya," peculiar to southern Queensland, and bearing cones 
as large as a child's head, which furnish the large seeds used as food by the 
aborigines. A. excelsa, R. Br., so often seen planted in Australia, is the " Nor- 
folk Island Pine," and is not indigenous to Australia. Adventitious leaf 
or branch buds in the form of woody nodules, and which are really abortive 
branches, are found in the bark of some trees, particularly those of certain 
Araiicarias. 

Arthrolaxis is confined to Tasmania, where there are three species found 
in the western mountains. All are small or medium-sized trees, valued, 
like all the Pinacese, for their timber. A. cupressoides, D. Don, is the 
original " King William Pine," a designation now also often given to A. 
selaginoides, D. Don ; the third species is A. laxifolia, Hook. f.. and all three 
are sometimes called " Red Pine," because of the colour of the timber. 

The genus Callitris is the most abundant pine in Australia. It contains 
fifteen species, and is found from Tasmania to the tropics, and from the sea 
coast to the arid interior. Sometimes these trees, called " Cypress Pine," 
are so abundant as to be looked upon as a pest. They are usually beautiful 
trees, sometimes bright-green, and sometimes glaucous, and the species are 
largely determined on the shape of the cone. They chiefly occur in New 
South Wales and Queensland, but are common in Western Australia. 

Filzroya has two species, one confined to Tasmania, the other to temperate 
South America. The Tasmaniau species, F. Archeri, Benth. and Hook, f., 
is a small shrub, and is found on mountain tops in the southern part of the 
island. 

C. 121.^4. N 



19i Federal Handbook. 



The Cycadace^ are represented in Australia by three genera, Macro- 
zamia, Cycas, and Bowenia. The first is by far the most abundant, and is 
chiefly developed in eastern New South Wales and Queensland, and, to a 
less extent, in south-western Australia. There are sixteen species, M. spiralis, 
Miq,, occurring extensively both in southern and northern New South Wales ; 
a number of forms, M. Fawcetti, heteromera, cylindrica, secunda, flexuosa, 
all named by C. Moore, were first brought under notice as horticultural 
varieties, but I look upon them as good species. All are less robust than 
M. spiralis. M. Perowskiana, I\Iiq., is a taller species, and occurs in northern 
New South Wales and southern Queensland, while M. Moorei, F. v. ^I., 
of Springsure, Queensland, is a larger species. M. Hopei, W. Hill, of north 
Queensland, is the largest of all, and is stated to attain a height of 60 feet. 
M. Miquelli, F. v. M., extends from near Brisbane to Rockhampton, Queens- 
land, but 31. platyrachis, Bail., M. Paulo-Gulielmi, F. v. M. (an especially 
graceful species), M. Mountperriensis, Bail., M. Douglasi, Hill and F. v. M., 
are more restricted in their habitats. M. Macdoniielli, F. v. M., is found in 
the Macdonnell Ranges of northern South Australia, technically in the 
Northern Territory, while M. Fraseri, ]\Iiq., and ill. Dyeri, F. v. M., are 
peculiar to Western Australia. Macrozamias in New South Wales go under 
the name of " Burrawang." 

The four species of Cycas are confined to northern Queensland, and our 
two species of Bowenia, B. spectabilis, Hook., and B. serrulata (Andre), Chamb., 
have a somewhat similar range. All our Cycads, apart from their very great 
botanical interest, are of special horticultural value. 

The interest of the small family Amaryllide^ (26 Australian species) 
will be in four out of its seven genera, Doryanthes, Crinum, Calostemma, and 
Eurydes. 

Of Doryanthes we have two species, D. excelsa, Correa, and D. Palmeri, 
W. Hill ; both are very large plants, with large sword-shaped leaves and 
with very tall flowering stems and massive inflorescence. The former is 
from coastal New South Wales and Queensland ; the latter, which is some- 
what variable, is confined to southern Queensland. The flowers are crimson 
in colour. Our Crinums are eleven in number, all found in Queensland, 
and several extending to northern Australia. One also occurs in New South 
Wales, as does also a small and beautiful species (C. flaccidum, Herb.), which 
is found in the interior of all the States except Tasmania. The two 
species of Calostemma, C. purpureum, R. Br., and C. luteum, Sims, are also 
from the drier country. Eurydes Cunninghamii, Ait., is found in north 
coastal New South Wales and coastal Queensland ; E. amhoinensis. Loud., 
occurs in Queensland and northern Australia, and extends to the Indian 
Archipelago. 

The Australian Liliace^ amount to 189 species in 4-5 genera. Only 
some of the more prominent genera can be taken notice of. Blandfordia 
known as " Christmas Bells," comprises four species, three of which are 
found in coastal New South Wales, one extending to Queensland, while one 
is confined to Tasmania. The flowers are reddish or reddish-brown or 
yellow, and very ornamental. 

Thysanotus is the " Fringed Violet," because the flowers are of a violet 
colour, and fringed at the edges. They are small plants, with grass-like 



Australian Vegetation. 195 

leaves. There are 21 species, of which fourteen are found in Western Aus- 
tralia. South Australia has six, and Victoria and New South Wales four each. 

The genu== Xerotes consists of 37 species, rush-like plants, with small 
flowers usually dull-yellow, dioecious. Xanthorrhoeas are the " grass trees " 
of eastern Australia, the " Black-boys " of Western Australia, and the 
" Yuccas " of Kangaroo Island and part of South Australia. They have 
usually a caudex, showing the charred bases of the grass-like leaves, which 
form a tuft at the top. Each caudex is surmounted by a spear-like flowering 
spike. They exude a yellowish or reddish resin which was formerly known 
as " Gum accroides," and now as " Grass-tree Gum " or " Black-boy Gum." 
There are 13 species, only 2 being found in Western Australia, while 5 are 
found in South Australia, including 1, X. Thornioni, Tate, in the Macdonnell 
Ranges. Two species are found in Tasmania, 3 in Victoria, 4 in Queensland 
(including the tiny X. pumilio, R. Br., from Port Curtis), and .5 in Xew South 
Wales. 

The monotypic genus Kingia {australis, R. Br.) reminds one a good deal 
of a Xanthorrhcea with a long caudex, but it has several scapes, and the 
flowers are arranged in a globular terminal head so that it becomes a many- 
headed grass tree. It is accordingly known as " Drum-head Grass-tree," 
and because of the silvery appearance of its foliage " Silver-leaf Grass-tree." 
It is often a conspicuous feature of the landscape from Albany to Perth, 
Western Australia. 

Cyperace^ are well developed in Australia, numbering 421 species so 
far. The cosmopolitan genus Cyperus is strongly developed (72 species) 
and well diffused in Australia, with predominance in Queensland and New 
South Wales, but most species are non-endemic. Schwnus is even more 
largely represented (77 species), and is widely diffused, with, however, a 
strong Western Australian preponderance. All Australian genera of 
Cyperacese are more or less common, with the exception of a few of the small 
ones. Fimbristylis, with its 58 species, is chiefly North Australian and then 
Queensland. Of the remaining genera the principal, Heleocharis (13), Scirpus 
(26), Carex (43), are alike well diffused in Australia and in other parts of the 
world. Scleria (13) is chiefly Queensland and northern Australia, and 
Lepidosperma (36) and Gahnia (29) are characteristic constituents of the 
vegetation; the former genus is almost endemic, while species of the latter 
freely occur in New Zealand. 

Of Gramine^, 433 species have been described to date, and, as with so 
many of our families, many additional ones will doubtless be brought under 
notice. From the economic point of view they are very important, for they 
are the stand-by of the countless flocks and herds of this continent. It is 
not possible to do justice to them in a brief sketch, nor is it possible to refer 
to the rich crop of aliens, purposely or accidentally introduced. There are 
78 indigenous genera ; but only fourteen, comparatively small, are endemic. 
Many of the species are endemic, and, taking them as a whole, the specie's 
are well diffused throughout the States. 

Of Pavicum there are 75 species ; they are useful almost without excep- 
tion. The long trailing Sjntiifex is not to be confused with the " Spinifex " 
of bushmen, which is the name given to Triodia, mostly dense, hummocky, 
prickly species of the dry country. Neurnchne is " Miilga Grass," because 

N 2 



196 Federal Handbook. 



it is often found under Mulga {Acacia aneura, F. v. M.). Of Andropogon 
we have 27 species, including some of the best fodder plants, such as " Blue 
Grass," e.g., A. sericeus, R. Br., and its allies. Anthistiria ciliata, L. f., is 
the well-known " Kangaroo Grass," A. membranacea, Lindl., " Flinders 
Grass," while A. imberbis, Retz., is called " Bundle Bundle " in Western 
Australia. Aristida with its characteristic trifid awn, has ten species, and 
is often called " Wire Grass." The inflorescence of Stipa is sometimes 
elegantly plumose (particularly S. elegantissima, LabilL), while the hardened 
tip of the flowering glume enclosing the grain, bores, aided by the twisted 
awn, into the flesh of animals, and hence they are called " Spear Grasses." 
Certain species become obnoxious to the pastoralist, but all yield useful 
feed when young. 

Only eight species of Danthonia are found, but D. penicillata, F. v. M., 
the widely diffused " Silver Grass," or " Wallaby Grass," is one of the best 
of fodder grasses, and D. robusta, F. v. M., a coarse species, is the best fatten- 
ing grass on the Mount Kosciusko Plateau. Astrebla is a small genus, but 
its triticoid species are valuable dry-country grasses and are called " Mitchell 
Grasses." Cynodon dactylon, L. C. Rich., is the " Couch Grass " of coastal 
New South Wales and Queensland, one of our most valuable grasses for pas- 
tures and for lawns ; it is identical with the " Doub " of India and the 
" Bermuda Grass " of the United States. 

There are thirteen species of Poa, some harsh and some succulent fodder 
grasses. The introduced P. annua, L., is complementary to Cynodon dactylon, 
since it takes its place every winter. Eragrostis claims 28 species, some 
with an ornamental inflorescence, some capable of great drought resistance, 
even bulbous, and all more or less valuable for sheep. 

Two species of Bambusa (Bamboo) are found, one in Queensland, and the 
other in north Australia. 

Stenotaphrum americanum, Sch., is an American grass acclimatised in 
the coastal districts, and invariably known as " Buffalo Grass," from the 
circumstance that, in the very early days, it was fijst observed near Sydney 
after the visit of an American ship The Buffalo. It is, however, not to be 
confused with the grass known in America as Bufialo {Bouteloua). 

The Brazilian Paspalum dilatatum, Poir., and the South African Chloris 
Gayana, Kunth, have proved themselves valuable fodder grasses for dairy 
cattle. Ammophila arundinacea. Host., " Marram Grass," has, particularly 
in southern Victoria, proved an admirable sand stay. 

14. The Flora of the Individual States. 
(a) Western Australia. 

Western Australia is the largest State of the Commonwealth, practically 
comprising the western third of it. It contains many varieties of soils, light 
and sandy prevailing. The south-western portion is the best watered, and 
here the chief timber-wealth is to be found. 

The northern portion of the State approaches the tropics, and has many 
plants in common with the Northern Territory, which adjoins it. It is not 
remarkable for the height of its mountains, but all of its mountain country is 
full of interest to the botanist. For example, the Kimberley country is much 
indented by fiords ; it is also mountainous, consisting of alternating high 



Australian Vegetation. 197 

and lower lying plateaux, the highest country being principally sandstone. 
In this district we have the Princess May Range, south-east from York Sound, 
and probably reaching an altitude of over 3,000 feet, while the King Leopold 
Range, south-east from Collier Bay, although attaining a little less elevation, 
also promises rich rewards to the botanical investigator. 

In the Hammersley Range in the north-western district (much of which 
is mountainous), and between the Fortescue and the Ashburton Rivers, is 
Mt. Bruce (3,800 feet), reputed to be the highest point in the State. 

In the south-west district, the important range is the Darling, running 
nearly due north and south from Yatheroo, in the north, to Point D'Entre- 
casteaux, on the south coast. This range lies parallel to and from 18-20 
miles distant from the western sea-board, and is the most important range 
in the State by reason of its efiect on the climatic conditions of the most 
closely settled areas. The highest point, Mt. William, in the Mm-ray district, 
is 1,700 feet. 

Stirling Range, 40 miles north-east of Albany, the loftiest range in the 
southern portion of the State, is perfectly isolated and, rising abruptly from 
a low-lying coastal plain, is visible for a great distance. Mt. Tulbrunup, 
over 3,000 feet, is the highest peak, and the whole range is of fascinating 
interest to the botanist. 

A large proportion of the south-west and south sea-boards, is of a flat 
and sandy character, with indications of a recent geological formation, and 
may be described as a vast forest, principally timbered with Jarrah {Eucalyp- 
tus marginata, Sm.), Red Gums {E. calophylla, R. Br.), Karri {E. diversicolor, 
F. V. M.). The Tuart {E. gomphocephala, DC.) is confined to the coastal 
limestone strip south of Perth, while further north is the beautiful yellow 
flowered E. erythrocorys, F. v. M. 

In the south-west, not only is there a very good rainfall, but subterranean 
water is not far from the surface. The Esperance district on the south coast 
has an especially rich flora. In the drier parts. Western Australia is remark- 
able for the number and extent of its salt lakes, which support a true saline 
flora. They often give the impression of a mirage. 

Between the 30th parallel of latitude and of the Great Australian Bight, 
much of the country is of limestone formation, and here there are immense 
areas of grassland which only wait the discovery of sul:)terranean water to 
make them amongst the most productive areas of the State. The author is 
indebted for most of his notes on the physical features to the report of Mr. 
F. S. Brockman in Eraser's Year-hook of Western Australia. 

No considerable portion of the interior lying between the 19th and 31st 
parallels of latitude, and between 121st and 129th ineridians of longitude, 
is suitable for any class of settlement except in connexion with mineral 
resources (chiefly gold). This area may be described as a great tableland 
with an altitude of 1,000-2,000 feet above sea-level, the surface of which con- 
sists largely of sand-dunes, though in many parts of it there are large areas. 
of clayey soils. It would be a contradiction of terms to call it desert, for it 
supports a copious and beautiful flora. 

Mr. Henry Deane says that the soil of the country from Kalgoorlie, in 
Western Australia, to Spencer's Gulf, in South Australia, is for the most part 



198 Federal Handbook. 



good, and covered with vegetation consisting of various saltbushes {Atri- 
plex), blue bush {Kochia, etc.), grass, and other shrubs, mostly edible, and 
trees of various kinds, such as Mulga {Acacia aneura, F. v. M.), Myall {A. 
pendula, A. Cunn.), Mallee {Eucalyptus oleosa, uncinata, etc.), and Myoporum, 
with fi'equent bushes of Sandalwood {Santalum cygnorum, Miq.), and Quan- 
dong {Fusanus acuminatus, R. Br.). 

In the western State, one will hear much of the term " sand-plain," and 
it is wonderful how these light sandy areas, usually devoid of trees, maintain 
very gardens of flowers. 

The physical features (mountains chiefly) have been referred to in a little 
detail, as they are of especial interest to the visiting botanist, who will 
probably endeavour to explore the Darling Eange, and perhaps the Stirling 
Range, if he makes an extended stay. Here it may be at once said that 
Western Australia is the State which will probably have most fascination for 
him, for its pre-eminence as a botanist's paradise is without question. The 
work of most of the visitors will, however, on this occasion, be entirely 
devoted to that truncated portion between the mouth of the Murchison on 
the west and Esperance on the south coast, while the true south-west, a more 
truncated area still, covers more ground than most can even skim over. 
In giving the palm to this area, it may be mentioned that a journey in the 
express to Kalgoorlie will rapidly give some impression of the beauty and 
variety of the desert flora, while the alpine floras of Tasmania, Victoria, and 
New South Wales, and the rich brush vegetation of eastern New South 
Wales and Queensland, come only second in botanical interest to the more 
obvious botanical glories of the western State. 

The yellow-flowered genus Hibhertia (Dilleniace^) is widely difiused, 
and contains about 105 species, more than half of which are peculiar to 
Western Australia. 

The floriferous and beautiful pink-flowering genus Tetratheca, of the 
purely Australian family Tremandrace^, is almost entirely confined to 
Western Australia, the exceptions being the protean and widely difiused 
T. ericifolia, Sm. (forms of wliich have been described under no less than 
seven names), and two others. 

The beautiful genus of shrubs Thomasia (Sterculiace^), with 23 species, 
is confined to Western Australia, with the exception of T. petalocalyx, which 
extends as far east as Victoria. 

The Western Australian Pitcher-plant, Cephalotus follicularis, Labill. 
(Cephalotace^), in which the radical leaves are converted into pitchers, 
is peculiar to that State, and is found around Albany, in rich peaty bogs 
of considerable depth, with the pitchers close to the ground, sheltering under 
the shadow of long tussocks, say, 3 ft. 6 in. high, of rushes, sedges, Legu- 
minosse, yellow Sundews, &c. It can hardly be seen except by pulling the 
tussocks aside. 

The Droseras (Droserace^), which are covered with glandular hairs 
which entangle insects, are found in all the States, but Western Australia 
is especially rich in them, where they form an important and interesting, if 
frequently a humble, constituent of the vegetation, for in that State are to 
be found about 45 out of about 62 Australian species, most of which are 
very rich in individuals. 



Australian Vegetation. 199 



The Caxdolleace.e are practically taken up with the genus Candollea 
{Stylidium), which, with some difference of opinion as to the limits of a 
species, has 107 species almost exclusively Australian. It has mostly rosettes 
of radical leaves, and is remarkable for the elasticity of the column which 
is formed by the filaments, which are connate with the style. This column 
is bent back normally, but when touched it suddenly straightens, and hence 
these plants are known as Trigger Plants. No less than 84 are Western 
Australian, and the genus is sparingly distributed over the rest of the conti- 
nent, Queensland and northern Australia being best represented after the 
western State. 

Coming to the Loranthace^e, Nuytsia floribunda, R. Br., the gorgeous 
Tree Mistletoe or Cabbage Tree, is a distinctly wonderful plant. It is a 
medium-sized tree, which grows on sandy land from King George's Sound 
to the Murchison, in Western Australia, and the whole of the tree, when in 
bloom, is one mass of beautiful orange-coloured flowers. It is one of the 
most gorgeous trees in the world. It is root-parasitic, and hence the very 
great difficulty of successfully transplanting it. Seedlings are raised without 
difficulty, but they usually do not attain maturity. The same remarks 
apply to that allied shrub with sweet-scented flowers, Atkinsonia ligustrina, 
F. V. M., which is sparingly found in the Blue Mountains of New South Wales. 
The other Mistletoes are chiefly represented by the genus Loranthus, wliich, 
though not endemic, is so abundant and so conspicuous that visitors cannot 
fail to observe it. Huge pendant masses will be observed attached to 
the Eucalypts, whose leaves it somewhat resembles ; other species likewise 
simulate the leaves of various other trees and shrubs to which they are 
attached. Nothothixos is parasitic on Loranthus, which contains 26 Aus- 
tralian species. 

The H^MODORACE^ are almost exclusively Western Australian, the genus 
Hwmodorum alone being found out of that State. Of 17 species, 7 belong to 
Western Australia, 1 is peculiar to Tasmania, 4 to Northern Australia, 
2 to New South Wales, and 1 to Queensland, while 2 are found in both New 
South Wales and Queensland. The genus Conostylis has 38 species ; the 
flowers are dull yellow, and the individuals very numerous. The greatest 
interest, however, will be given to the so-called " Kangaroo Paws " {Anigo- 
zanthus), some of which have very brilliant and bizarre colouring. Ekwen 
species have been described. 

The Iridace^ are in Australia practically synonymous with Patersonia 
(17 species), largely developed in the western State (12 species), while 4 
are in Victoria, 3 in New South Wales, and South Australia, Tasmania, and 
Queensland having 2 each. The conspicuous but delicate perianth is usually 
bluish or purplish in colour. 

The Restionace^ are closely allied in habit and inflorescence to the 
Cyperaceae, and are noteworthy from the great dissimilarity in habit and in- 
florescence between the males and females of some species. The faniily is 
almost limited to Australia, South Africa, and New Zealand, but our species 
(rather more than 100) are all endemic. The genera Reslio, Leplocarpus, 
and HypolcBna are also South African, and Australia has 25, 12, and 7 species 
respectively. These genera, together with Lepyrodia (15 species) are dif- 
fused throughout Australia, though they have a strong Western Australian 



200 Federal Handbook. 



element. Loxocarya (9), Lepidobolus (4), and some smaller genera are 
Western Australian. 

To here give more than a sketchy account of the flora of Western Aus- 
tralia is out of the question. It is remarkable for its showy and abundant 
Leguminosse, for its abundance of endemic beautiful and remarkable Pro- 
teacese, including the genus Dryandra (allied to Banksia), for the profusion 
of its Groodeniacese, including the blue Leschenaultias, and so on. Its 
Eucalyptus flora is most interesting. It is, however, not a land of ferns, 
the number of species found there being under twenty. 

(b) South Australia (including part of the Northern Territory). 

South Australia and the Northern Territory form a slice taken through 
the middle of Australia from the Indian Ocean to the Southern Ocean, the 
western boundary being 129° E. longitude. They are separated from each 
other by the 26° of S. latitude, while on the east the South Australian boundary 
is 141° E. longitude, and that of the Northern Territory is 138°. 

South Australia is for the greater part of its area, with the important 
exception of the south-east, comparatively treeless. The sub-tropical por- 
tion is for the most part of low elevation, and much of it is sparse open forest 
and steppes. It is a country of comparatively low rainfall, and the indigenous 
species are admirably dealt with in Tate's Flora, and the introduced plants 
in J. M. Black's Naturalized Flora. 

Australian Steppes {Lake Eyre Basin). — Baldwin Spencer writes,* " There 
is a vast tract of country comprising the great Lake Eyre Basin, stretching 
from this eastwards and northwards, into the interior of New South Wales 
and Queensland, and up to and beyond the Macdonnell Ranges, across which 
run such intermittent streams as the Cooper, the Warburton, the Macumba, 
the Finke, and the Todd, dry for the greater part of the year, but every now 
and then at varying intervals of time swollen with heavy floods, which 
spread out over wide tracts, and for. a time transform the whole country 
into a land covered with a luxuriant growth of vegetation. To this part 
of the continent the name of the ' Australian Steppes ' may be suitably 
applied." 

Favenc speaks of the mystery of the Lake Eyre system of drainage, which 
lies in the final exit of its waters. The lake is a sink for the rivers flowing 
into it, and is mostly a dry bed, the southern portion alone holding water. 
In spite of its army of affluents, it is never full nor visibly affected as a whole, 
and it has no outlet to the ocean. It is estimated that its watershed is over 
400,000 square miles. 

Spencer divides the Steppes into Lower Steppes, Higher Steppes, and 
Desert Country. 

Lower Steppes. — From Oodnadatta to Charlotte Waters (here the 
Northern Territory begins) and the Finke River to the James Range. 

These include the Cretaceous table-topped hills and tablelands ; these 
elevated plains slope gradually towards Lake Eyre from an altitude of 1,000 
feet above sea-level to 39 feet below sea-level at Lake Eyre. The great 
Cretaceous formation with its alternating stony or gibber plains, loamy flats, 
and low-lying terraced hills, is capped with desert sandstone. 

• Horn Exped. Hep. i. 



Australian Vegetation. 201 



On the loamy flats, and even gibber plains, the most noticeable planf; is 
Salsola Kali, L., commonly known as the Roly Poly, detaching itself froui the 
ground, and forming spherical masses perhaps a yard or more in diameter. 
It is a constant feature of the Cretaceous area. The lines of the water-courses 
are marked with bolts of gum trees and Acacias, chiefly Eucalyptus rostrata, 
Schlect., the River Gum ; E. microtheca, F. v. M., the Swamp Gum or Box ; 
Acacia aneura, F. v. M., the Mulga ; A. cyperophylla, the Red Mulga ; and 
A. Camhagei, R. T. Baker, the Gidgee. 

The Higher Steppes comprise the southern part of the James Range and 
the George Gill and Levi Ranges. 

These include — 

(a) The great central group of the Macdonnell Ranges, trending in a 
nearly east and west direction for a distance of about 400 miles, 
and with a width varying from 20 to 50 miles, thus covering an 
area of more than 10,000 square miles. Several peaks are over 
4,000 feet high, while the surrounding country is over 2,000 feet. 

(6) The James, Waterhouse, George Gill, and Levi Ranges. These 
have a mean combined width, if we include the intervening 
plains and valleys, of from 60 to 70 miles. The area occiipied 
by them, therefore, must be more than 1-5,000 square miles. 
The highest points are situated in the most northern ridge, as 
in the case of Mt. Gillen, whicli is nearly 3,000 feet above sea- 
level. There is a gradual decrease in elevation in the ranges 
from north to south, each range to the south constituting as it 
were a step in the descent from the Macdonnell Ranges to the 
plains. 

On the Higher Steppes are an interesting Cycad and only one {Macro- 
zamia (Encephalartos) MacDonnelU, F. v. M.), one Palm (Livistona Marice, 
F. v. M., known in one colony of a hundred individuals only), a Grass Tree 
{Xanthorrhoe a Thorntoni, Tate), one Epacrid {Leucopogon Mitehelli, Benth.), 
while there are representatives of the genera Capparis, Hibbertia, Melaleuca, 
Grevillea, Loranthus, Cassia, Eremophila, and trees up to 40 or .50 feet in 
height of Acacia salicina, Lindl. ; Eucalyptus oleosa, F. v. M., in the form 
of a Mallee, and a Bloodwood {E. terminalis, F. v. M.) are also found. 

Speaking of the saxatile vegetation. Professor Tate, in his report on the 
botany of the Horn Expedition, says that the number of actual species on 
the tablelands and high level tracts is absolutely few, but that it was in the 
gorges of the tablelands and on the basal part of the craggy escarpments and 
their taluses that a varied flora occurs. 

What he terms the Larapintine Flora, the flora of the Finke Rivei- and the 
other districts the Horn Expedition traversed, he classifies as follows : — 

(1) Exotic species, chiefly oriental. 

(2) Endemic species of exotic genera. 

(3) Endemic species of Australian genera. 

Under (1) he uses the term " exotic " in its derivative sense, for most of 
the species are ordinarily classed as Australian natives. 



202 Federal Handbook. 



Of the " Australasian " genera, he records the foUowinj?, with five or 
more species : — 

Ptilotns (11), Swainsona (7), Cassia (10), phyllodineous Acacias (24), 
Eucalyptus (10), Loranthus (5), Grevillea (9), Calotis (10), Helipterum 
(10), Gootlenia (15), Dicrastylis (5), EremopMla (17). 

The Desert Country. — From the G-eorge Gill Range to Ayers' Rock and 
Mt. Olga. This is one of the areas which may be fitly termed desert. 

Ayers' Rock and Mt. Olga. — In addition, to the mountain ranges referred 
to under " Higher Steppes," there are some isolated mountains. Rising 
like an enormous waterworn boulder is that remarkable isolated monolith 
known as Ayers' Rock. It is situated 32 miles S.S.W. of Lake Amadeus. 
The rock is quite bare, with the exception that a few fig-trees {Ficus platy- 
poda, A. Cunn.) maintain a precarious footing in the few crevices on its bare 
sides. Mount Olga, which from a distance presents a most remarkable 
outline, is 15 miles west of Ayers' Rock. 

Professor Tate divided intra-tropical South Australia into the Eremian 
or Desert Flora which occupies the arid region of central Australia, and 
corresponds with the " salt-bush country " of the pastoralist. This is con- 
tinuous with much country in eastern Western Australia, and western 
Queensland and New South Wales. The region is approximately limited 
by the rainfall line of 10 inches. 

His second division was the Euronotian Flora, which is dominant in the 
more humid parts of temperate Australia, excepting the extreme south- 
west. 

To speak of the whole interior of Australia as a Desert or Eremian Country 
is very misleading. Over wide areas, especially across the western half oi 
the interior, extend sand-hills and flats covered with Mulga scrub {Acacia 
aneura, F. v. M.) and Porcupine Grass (Triodia), which may be justly described 
as desert, e.g., some country stretching from the G-eorge Gill Range to Ayers' 
Rock and Mt. Olga, where no creeks run and uncertain water supplies may 
be found in rock-holes, but the Australian Steppes country of the interior 
is by no means desert. 

Kangaroo Island is the second Australian island in point of size ; it is 
of an oblong shape about 90 miles by 25, and is situated just off the coast 
of South Australia. The country is hilly and undulating, the highest eleva- 
tion being under 1,000 feet. There is but little permanent water on the island, 
and its vegetation is grouped by Tate as heathy, sylvan, and savannah. 
The flora is not rich, consisting of less than 400 species of phanerogams 
and vascular cryptogams. Very few species are endemic. Its flora bears 
strong affinity to that of the mainland, and is remarkable for the strong 
Tasmanian element it contains. 

South Australia, taken as a whole, is not remarkable for the number of 
its endemic plants ; most of them are in common with the indefinitely-zoned 
dry areas of the contiguous States. 

(c) Victoria. 

Victoria is a State which in its eastern portion (Gippsland) has conditions 
which strongly resemble those of the southern coastal belt of New South 
Wales. It is the home of the tallest trees of the Australian continent, 



Australian Vegetation. 203 



probably second only in this respect to those of California. In the south- 
west we have a basaltic plain which is remarkably fertile. This has scattered 
forests, and is pastoral and agricultural country. North of these areas are 
the western and eastern highlands, the latter higher and moister, and both 
containing rich open forests consisting almost entirely of Eucah-ptus. In 
the Wimmera, in the north-western portion, we have a region of comparatively 
low rainfall, similar to much of the South Australian territory adjacent 
and to the western plains of New South Wales. 

No State of the Commonwealth has had its flora more fully examined 
than Victoria, since the late Baron von Mueller was for so many years Govern- 
ment Botanist of that State ; indeed he took unofficial botanical charge of 
the whole of Australia. For purposes of botanical-geography he divided 
the State into five parts, chiefly based on the river systems : — 

(a) The north-western region, from the sources of the water-courses 
in the north-west to the Murray River. This is the driest area. 

(h) The south-west region, from the sources of the water-courses in 
the south-west, to the coast west of Cape Otway and to the vicinity 
of the Glenelg River. This includes much rich plains country. 

(c) The southern region, fi'om the sources of the water-courses in the 

south to the vicinity of Cape Otway to Port Pliillip (Melbourne 
district), and to the western boundary of Gippsland. 

(d) The north-eastern region, from the sources of the water-courses 

in the north-east to the Hume River, including the Victorian 
Alps. Here we have the alpine vegetation contiguous to that of 
New South Wales, and with a strong Tasmanian and Antarctic 
element. 

(e) The eastern region, comprising Gippsland, exclusive of the Alps- 

Tins is an especially well-watered area, and a celebrated forest 
region, including the habitat of the tallest trees of Australia. 

The Otway district is a well-known forest region, e.g., for its magnificent 
Blue Gum {Eucalyptus globulus, Labill.) areas, and for the Beech forests 
(Fagus CunningJiamii, Hook. f.). 

Admirable general accounts of the flora of Victoria have been given by 
C. A. Topp,* G. Weindorfer,-}- and Professor A. J. 'Ewart.f 

Topp characterizes the prevailing botanical featm'es, first of the shores of 
Port Pliillip and of the district in its immediate vicinity, then the flora of 
the fern-tree gullies (in which Victoria is rich), such as may be found in the 
Dandenong Range and on the Main Divide, running into the Watts' River and 
other mountain streams, and, thirdly, he gives a brief account of the interesting 
alpine flora of the north-eastern mountain system, between Omeo and Har- 
rietville, on the peaks and spurs of Mts. Feathertop, Bogong, and Hotham. 

Weindorfer divides the State into three, the first and largest of which 
forms part of the south-eastern Australian forest flora, and is looked upon 
as an intermediate link between the Antarctic flora and that of the tropical 
east and north of the continent. The second division is formed by a part of 
the central Australian desert flora, which penetrates to the north-west corner 

• Hawlhooh AiMl. Assoc, .iilo. Sci., Melbourne, I'JOO, p. 170. 
t Victor inn Year-Book, l'.)04, Part i., p. 19. 
X Vict. ^al. XXV., 7« (1908). 



204 Federal Handbook. 



of the State, constituting tlie " Mallee " (Mueller's north-west region). The 
third and smallest division is the alpine flora, which is restricted to the highest 
points of the alpine mountains in the north-eastern corner of the State 
(Mueller's north-eastern region). Weindorfer's first large division therefore 
includes the divisions (b), (c), (e) of Mueller. 

He points out that Victoria's endemic flora is 7*6 per cent. (46 species 
in all) less than that of the floras of any of the other States, and is to be 
accounted for by the comparatively regular and heavy rainfall over a large 
area, and which caused Sir Thomas Mitchell, Surveyor-General of New South 
Wales, to designate the central portion of it " Australia Felix." 

The Grampians form what have been termed the natural garden of 
Victoria, for the flora of this range is alike varied and beautifiil. 

Ewart's paper is more ecological in character, being written less from the 
taxonomic side. He deals with the factors which influence a flora, and briefly 
applies them to Victoria in the form of notes. Thus be touches upon geo- 
log'cal history, present climate, the effect of settlement on the native flora, 
and cognate subjects in pregnant paragraphs. 

Under Eucalyptus regnans, F. v. M., which the author has recommended 
to be known as " Giant Gum," there is given* a full account of the Giant Trees 
of Australia, together with a record of the controversies which took place 
nearly 30 years ago. The tallest trees in Australia, so far proved, are those 
of Gippsland, Victoria, and are E. regnans, F. v. M. Claimants for this 
distinction are the giant Karris (E. diversicolor, F. v. M.), of south-western 
Australia, but the heights assigned to this species require confirmation by 
surveyors. The " King-trees" of eastern New South Wales, viz., the Black- 
butts {E. pilularis, Sm.), of the Illawarra, and the Tallow-woods {E. micro- 
corys, F. v. M.) of the Lansdowne Eiver, may be as bulky (though not so 
high) as the Gippsland trees, but this requires to be proved. 

The official size of the tallest Gippsland tree is given as — height, 
326 ft. 1 in. ; girth, 25 ft. 7 in., measured 6 feet from ground ; locality, 
spur of Mt. Baw Baw, 91 miles from Melbomrne. This is enormous, but 
different fi-om the alleged heights of from 400 to 525 feet foisted on Mueller, 
and which will probably not be eradicated from the newspapers for another 
generation. 

As regards the Calif ornian trees brought into comparison. Prof. Sargent, 
an eminent authority, may be quoted, and in view of the actual measure- 
ments that he presents, viz., 340 feet in height for a Redwood and a girth 
round the trunk of 107 feet for its congener the " Big Tree," an opinion 
may be expressed that, so far as is known at present, California is the home 
both of the tallest and of the broadest trees in the world. The difference 
(under 14 feet) against the Gippsland tree is not large, and it would not be 
sm-prising if additional investigations should cause this friendly competition 
between Australia and the United States to end differently. 

(d) Tasmania. 

This is by far the smallest of the Australian States, but by reason of its 
generous rainfall, comparatively high latitude, and great range of elevation, 
it is a paradise of " antarctic " plants for the botanist. 

• " Forest Flora of New South Wales," Part XVllI., p. 161. 



Australian Veoetation. 205 

It lias a climate which greatly resembles that of Britain. It is well 
wooded, not only with Eucalypts, but with Beeches {Fagus Cunninf/hninii, 
Hook, f.), and with valuable Conifers, Huon Pine {Dacrydiuin Franklinii, 
Hook, f.), King William Pine {Arthrotaxis selaginoides, Don, and cup lessoides, 
Don), Celery Top Pine {PhyUocladus rhomboidalis, Rich.), Oys'pi Bay Pine 
(Callitris rhomboidea, R. Br.), now seriously diminishing. The western 
portion is a region of high rainfall, and the Beech forests are almost 
impenetrable. 

A singular plant is the endemic Anodopetalum biglandulosum, A. Cunn. 
(Saxifi'agacefe), a tree common in the forests of the south and west, and which 
grows in a remarkable horizontal position, hence the name " Horizontal 
Scrub." 

The flora of Tasmania and its relations are very well known, originally 
through the classical work of Hooker,* and, later, through an admirable 
" Flora, "f the work of the present Government Botanist. 

Hooker refers to the strong east Australian character of the flora, the 
island having been formerly joined to the mainland, and of the non -Australian 
element he points out the greater proportion of New Zealand, South American, 
Antarctic, and even European plants not found on the Australian continent. 

The strong affinity of the Tasmanian and Australian alpine flora is obvious 
to any student who examines the two lists, and in most cases the isolation 
of the two areas has not been continued for a sufficiently long period to 
bring about any obvious difference in the facies of the plants. The Tasmanian 
affinities in the Australian floras can be traced, in diminisliing abundance, 
over distant regions of the mainland. 

In view of the distribution of the true Beeches {Fagus), it may be noted 
that there are three species, F. Gnnnii, Hook. f. (Fagacese), a small shrub 
confined to a few mountain summits in Tasmania, F. Cunninghamii, Hook, f., 
the so-called Myrtle, a large and beautiful tree found in Tasmania and Vic- 
toria, and F. Moorei, F. v. M., " Negro-head Beech," also a beautiful tree, 
occurring on some of the coastal tablelands of central New South Wales, 
far removed geographically from its congeners. 

Reference may be made to a suggestive paper by RodwayJ in which he 
discusses the origin of the flora of his State, e.g., the Tasmanian and Fuegian 
Fagi, and notes the presence of almost identical parasitic Cyttarias in both 
countries. 

(e) New South Wales. 

New South Wales is a State whose botanical conditions are largely com- 
parable to those of Queensland. The climatic factors vary from temperate 
to sub-tropical. 

She has the rich coastal belt, then the elevated tablelands which fall 
away to the western plains, which are only barren when no rain falls. Her 
coastal belt, and gullies running into the ranges and tablelands, produce 
many " brush " timbers, at the same time supporting various types of open 
forest, while the western slopes and plains produce valuable small trees 
acclimatised to regions of low rainfall. 

* Flora T'tsmnniefe. 

t The Tasmanian Flora, by Leonard Kodway (I'JO.'i). 

I Proe. A.A.A.S., xili. 2.50. 



206 Federal Handbook. 



New South Wales joins with Queensland in her brush vegetation ; with 
Victoria and Tasmania as regards alpine plants ; in her western slopes and 
wide western plains with Western Australia, and the rest of the continent in a 
share of the true Australian indigenous flora. 

Many distinctive New South Wales plants will, theretore, be found referred 
to under Queensland ; a very brief statement may be made in regard to the 
endemic flora of the parent State. Endenaism must be usually spoken of with 
a qualification, for every year are found important additions to the reputed 
restricted habitats of plants. 

They include two species of Streptothamus (Flacourtiacese), both climbing 
plants from the northern rivers, a few bipinnate Acacias, and a few 
Eucalypts. 

In the Saxifgrageee is the important genus Ceratopetalum, comprising 
two handsome coastal trees, the flowers of " Christmas-tree or Bush " {C. 
gummiferum, Sm.) being especially beautiful ; also Acrophyllum venosum, 
Benth., a charming shrub of the Blue Mountains. 

Amongst the Proteaccse are the small genus Symphyonema, the only 
Lamhertia out of Western Australia, and a number of Grevilleas, the hand- 
somest of the Telopeas {T. speciosissima, R. Br., the Waratah) ; a few 
Goodeniacese and Compositae, some Prostantheras, a few Styphelias, Leuco- 
pogons, and Epacris ; some of the smaller species of Macrozamia, amongst 
orchids, one or two each of Dendrohium, Sarcochilus, Diuris, Prasophyllum. 
and Pterostylis. 

Further, a Hmmodorum (Haemadoracese). In the Liliacese, a couple 
of Blandfordias, an Allania, a Xerotis, and a Xanthorrhcea. Amongst the 
Restionacese, a Lepyrodia and a Restio ; and in the Cyperaceee, a very 
few species of Cyperus, Scirpus, Schoenus, and Gahnia ; also a very few 
grasses. 

There are two regions of abundant and large arboreal vegetation, 
namely, south-western and eastern Australia. Allusion has already been 
made to Gippsland, and there is also the coastal strip running along New 
South Wales and Queensland to Cape York. In both the latter States the 
Great Divide plays an important part in consideration of the distribution 
of the vegetation, but it is a common error to confuse it with the coastal 
ranges, or, indeed, to call it a range at all. It is, as Favenc has pointed out, 
the true edge of the interior plateau. 

In the south coast district are arborescent Rubiaceae {Coprosma and 
Canthium), arborescent Compositae {Aster argophyllus, Labill., Bedfordia 
salicina, DC, etc.). 

In the north coast, also a branch of the coastal strip, are found arborescent 
baccate Myrtaceae {Eugenia, &c.), arborescent Proteaceae, Brachychitons, 
Laporteas, &c., with Diploglottis Cunningliami, Hook, f., Panax elegans, 
F. V. M., and Archontophoenix Cunningkami (Bangalow), lifting their graceful 
heads amongst the surrounding vegetation. 

The coastal strip has or had trees wliich, although not the highest, may be 
the bulkiest of all Australian trees. Eucalyptus pilularis, Sm., and E. micro- 
c(trys, F. v. M., already referred to. 

The Cypress Pine forests of the western plains, and the Ironbark forests 
from Dubbo and north-eastward, are examples of pure gregarious forest. 



Australian Vegetation. 207 



(f) Queensland. 

Queensland is a region of rich coastal vine brushes (scrubs), tropical 
and sub-tropical, with rich basaltic or at least alluvial soils, and ample rain- 
fall. It contains a marvellous variety of trees, some of them very large, 
and some of ascertained economic value. Westerly there are broken elevated 
tablelands with rolling country beyond, much of it covered with open forest, 
of which Eucahjptus is an important constituent, and then, sloping away to 
the centre of Australia, are found conditions rarely favorable to tree life. 

The best general account of the vegetation of Queensland is by Domin.* 

It is in this State that the Austro-]\Ialayan element is most developed, 
and it is very important, particularly in the Cape York Peninsula. The 
Antarctic element is of very much less importance, and chiefly in evidence 
on the tops of the Bellenden-Ker Range, the highest land in the State. The 
true endemic flora is seen chiefly in the rolling downs and western plains, 
also in southern Queensland. 

The botano-geographical conditions are much the same as those already 
indicated for New South Wales, an outstanding feature being the greater 
extent of the rich soil of the coastal districts, together with a higher rainfall 
and of course a warmer climate, for the territory extends into the tropics. 
The result is a rich " brush " vegetation, far exceeding that to be found in 
any other part of Australia, and systematists will not exhaust the treasures 
for very many years. 

Mr. F. M. Bailey has already described very many species, and the diffi- 
culty of botanizing in the brushes is only known to those who have had 
experience of it. The tall trees grow lofty and near together like cathedral 
columns, exhibiting their commingled canopies to the sky, and much of the 
botanical material available is owing to windfalls and the breaking down by 
animals. Owing to the loftiness and the darkness, one often cannot see 
either flower or fruit, and if one shoots ofi a twig, it is often not recovered, 
and, even if obtained, it frequently cannot be matched with the tree which 
produced it. The tall creepers which run to the tops of the loftiest trees are 
even more difficult to examine. 

The numerous ranges and isolated mountains of Queensland afford rich 
collecting grounds to the botanists, who can be certain of harvests of such 
plants as orchids, palms, and ferns. To some extent Queensland is the 
antithesis of Western Australia, but her total of recorded plants already 
exceeds that of Western Australia. These two States, partly because of 
their size, have been least botanically explored. Queensland's boundless 
prairies are rich in natural grasses and forage plants, which render her one of 
the greatest cattle and sheep-raising countries in the world. 

Most of the Anoiucese are confined to Queensland (brushes), though 
five species come as far south as New South Wales and one {Eupomatialaurina, 
R. Br.) to Victoria. 

The Meliaceac are another family of trees almost entirely restricted to 
the brushes of coastal New South Wales and Queensland, the exceptions 
being confined — (a) to the genus Owenia, the inland " Colane," 0. acidula, 
F. V. M., extending to South Australia, while 0. reticulata, F. v. M., is the 
only representative of the family in Western Australia, in which State it is 

*" Queensland's Plant Associations," /Vw. Hon. -Voc, (^ xxlii.. 57. 



208 Federal Handbook. 



endemic ; (b) to Flindersia maculosa, the " Leopard Wood " of the drier 
portions of both States. The genus Flindersia, or " Rasp-pod/' is so called 
because of its usually large, muricate, septicidally-opening capsules, and 
fifteen species have now been described. Engler proposes to place it with 
the Rutacese. There is abundance of Dysoxylon, and Cedrela australis, 
F. V. M., is the well-known " Red Cedar." 

There are about twenty species of Vitis (Viticeae), all confined to the 
brushes of Queensland and New South Wales, with the exception that two 
extend to Victoria, on the south, and one species (F. augustissima, F. v. M.) 
is peculiar to Western Australia. Some form lianes of great size, and are 
water yielders ; some have been tried as Phylloxera-resistant stocks, but 
with no commercial success so far. 

Very extraordinary are the bladder-like organs of Utricularia (Lenti- 
bularinese), dainty little plants found in damp sandy land, which are modified 
leaflets. They have a valve-like arrangement, which enables them to catch 
minute water animals. There are 24 species, seven of them extending to 
Asia. Most have been described from Queensland, but they are not rare 
in New South Wales and Western Australia. 

Pitcher-plants, Nepenthes (Nepenthacese), in which the blade expands 
into a pitcher or ascidium, and the prolongation of the midrib into a lid-like 
process, are practically confined (in Australia) to the Cape York Peninsula. 
Mr. F. M. Bailey has described no less than ten new species from this district, 
all believed to be endemic. Only one non-endemic species {N. phyllamphora, 
Willd.) is recorded from Australia and the Pacific Islands. 

Amongst parasitic plants the leafless Cassytha of the Lauraceae, which 
covers shrubs with a tangled mass of twine, will be certainly seen by the 
visitor. There are also some native Dodders (Cuscuta), but an imported 
species {C. Epithymum, MmT.) is a serious pest, particularly to lucerne, 
and is, as a general rule, treated with severity. With the exception of 
Cassyiha, which occurs more or less all over the States, the Lauracese are tall 
trees of the coastal brushes, confined to New South Wales and Queensland, 
particularly the latter, four species extending to Asia. Sixteen species of 
Cryptocarya and fifteen of Endiandra have been described. 

Many of the species of Euphorbiaceae are widely difiused, but some 
genera, particularly those of Tribe Crotoneae, are predominantly eastern, 
being found in Queensland or extending to New South Wales. The family 
includes some doubtful poison plants. 

The genus Ficus (Moraceae) is almost entirely confined to the brushes 
of eastern Australia, largely preponderating in Queensland, with many 
species extending northerly into the Northern Territory, two {F. platypoda, 
A. Cunn., and orbicularis, A. Cunn.) finding their way into the centre of the 
continent. Southward a number of species are found in New South 
Wales. Some of the species are hemi-epiph}i;es, completely obliterating 
even large trees and fences unless controlled. The whole family has 
the same general distribution in Australia, being fond of moisture, deep 
soil, and warmth. There are three species of Laportea (Nettle Tree). 

Turning to the Orchidaceae, of which Australia has 439 species, there are not 
many Australian orchids which especially attract the orchid grower. Den- 
drobium bigibbum, Lindl., B. superbiens, Reichb., D. phalcenopsis, Fitzg. 



Australian Vegetation. 209 



(resembling superbiens), and D. undulatum var. Broomfieldi (a handsome 
north Australian variety with yellow flowers), D. speciosum, Sm., the "Rock 
Lily," with lemon yellow flowers, and D. falcorostrum, Fitzg., are certainly 
meritorious. Sarcochilus Fitzgeraldi, F. v. M., is the most beautiful of the 
genus, and worthy of cultivation. 

Caladenia Patersoni, R. Br., is reckoned by some to be the most charming 
of Australian terrestrial orchids. The Epiphytes are most developed in 
the brush forests of New South Wales and Queensland ; the terrestrial ones 
are diffused throughout the States. 

CalantJie veratrifolia, R. Br., with white flowers, Phaius grandifolius, 
Lour., var. Bernaysi, with yellow flowers, and Spathoglottis Paulinece, with 
reddish-brown ones, are handsome large terrestrials. Interesting leafless 
orchids are Galeola cassythioides, A. Cunn., not rare about Sydney ; G. Ledgeri, 
F. V. M., a very handsome denizen of the brush forests ; and Gastrodia sesa- 
moides, Lindl. 

The approximate number of the Australian species is given as follows : — 
Caladenia, 56 ; Pmsophyllum, 47 ; Deiidrobium, 45 ; Pterostylis (Green- 
hoods), 40 ; Thelymitra, 30 {T. gmndiflom, Fitzg., with blue flowers is very 
handsome) ; Diicris, 25 ; Sarcochilus, 24. Orchids are pre-eminently a 
family to be studied in the fresh state, with a flora available for reference, 
and justice cannot be done to these beautiful and interesting plants in the 
brief space available on the present occasion. 

Palm^. — The Palms of Australia are confined to the brush forests of 
Eastern Australia, and are mainly found in Queensland. New South Wales 
has Calamus Muelleri, Wendl. (a " Lawyer Palm "), Ldnospadix monostachyus, 
Wendl. and Drude (Walking Stick Palm), Archonotophcenix Cunninghamiana, 
Wendl. and Drude (Bangalow), and Livistona australis, Mart. (Cabbage 
Palm), the last extending into eastern Victoria, while L. Marice, F. v. M., 
the only palm of the interior, is found in the Macdonnell Ranges of South 
Australia. 

Queensland has six species of Calamus, six of Livistona, two of Bacularia, 
two of Guluhia, one each of Cdlyptrocalyx, Drymophlaeus, Areca, Cocos (the 
Coco-nut), Caryota, Licuala, Gorypha, and Borassus. The student of palms 
will be charmed with Queensland, and he will also find several Pandani and 
Freycinetias in the same State, only one Pandanus {pedunculatus, R. Br.) 
extending south down the New South Wales coast. 



C. 12154. 



210 Federal Handbook. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE ANIMAL LIFE OF AUSTRALIA. 

By W. A. Haswell, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S., Professor of Biology in the University 

of Sydney. 

SYNOPSIS. 

1. Introduction. 4. Reptiles. 

2. The Mammals. , 5. Amphibia. 

(a) The Monotremes. 6. Fresh- Water Fishes. 
(h) The Marsupials^ 7. Mollusca of the Land and the 

The Question of Degenera- Fresh-Water. 

TiON; The Families of Aus- 8. Crustaceans. 

tralian Marsupials ; Rela- 9. Insects. 

TiONSHiPS. 10. Scorpions and Spiders. 

(c) Non-Marsupial Mammals. 11. Centipedes and Millepedes. 

3. Birds— 12. Worms, Leeches, etc. 
Peculiar and Characteristic 

Fashlies. 

1. Introduction. 

In view of the narrow limits necessarily imposed, I have considered it best 
not only to restrict the following statements to the animals of the land and 
fresh water, leaving the marine fauna untouched, but also to leave out of 
account a number of terrestrial and aquatic groups, which, however important 
and interesting, are not known to contribute any characteristic features to 
the Australian fauna. Thus the Protozoa, the Parasitic Worms, the Rotifers, 
certain orders of Insects and Arachnida, and certain orders of Bu'ds, though 
quite as extensively developed in this region as in others, are not referred to 
in the following survey. 

The features distinguishing the fauna of Australia from that of the other 
main divisions of the earth's surface are by no means confined to the larger 
and more conspicuous animals. Many of the lower groups, in spite of the 
presence throughout most of them of cosmopolitan or widely-distributed 
forms, have their characteristic Australian facies. 



2. The Mammals. 

It is the Mammals, however, that constitute, on the whole, the most in- 
teresting part of the Australian fauna — Lateresting not only on account of 
their peculiarities of structure and mode of life, but also on account of the 
fact that in their case more than in that of any of the other groups, it is 
possible through fossil remains to trace their history in past geological 
periods, and from this, together with their present distribution, to draw 
deductions of importance regarding changes in the arrangement of the land- 
surfaces of the globe in the less remote geological periods. 

The entire Australian mammalian fauna, with the exception of the Dingo 
or Native Dog, a few Rodents, a number of Bats, including Fruit-eating 
Bats or Flying Foxes, and in the sea the Seals and Whales and Dugongs, is 
composed of Marsupials and Monotremes. 



Animal Life op Australia. 2U 



(a) The Monotremes. 

The most primitive of all the orders of Mammals — the Monotremes — are 
entirely confined to Australia, including Tasmania, and New Guinea. Not 
only is this the case, but there is no evidence of any members of this primitive 
group having existed in other parts of the world later than, at the latest, the 
oldest division (Lower Eocene) of the Tertiary period. It is possible, as held 
by some, that all the Mammals, remains of which, chiefly in the shape of lower 
jaws with teeth, have been found in Mesozoic strata in Europe, were near allies 
of the existing Australian Monotremes. But, be this as it may, there is good 
evidence from the resemblance in their tooth-structure to the living Ornitho- 
rhynchus that the small European ilesozoic Mammals known as the Multi- 
tuherculata were the ancestors of the Australian Monotremes. It is somewhat 
remarkable that no remains capable of being referred to the Monotremes 
or their supposed ancestors have up to the present been found in any 
part of the world but Europe and North America on the one hand, and 
Australia on the other. 

Little is known with regard to the structure of the long-extinct Multi- 
tuberculates, but what is known does not point to any high degree of 
speciahzation, except in so far as the teeth are concerned. The living Mono- 
tremes — the Platypus or Duck-bill [Ornithorhynchus) and the Spiny Ant- 
eater {Echidna) — on the other hand, are extremely specialized, and must 
differ very widely from their supposed ancestors. Both are very remarkable 
creatures, and remarkable in very different ways, for, though their relationship 
in essentials — in the structure of their shoulder-girdle, for example, and in 
their oviparity with all that goes with it — is indisputable, their divergence 
in more superficial points is extreme. The resemblances are confined super- 
ficially to the general shape of the trunk, to the presence of short thick limbs, 
all provided (except in the Papuan Pro-Echichm) with the full complement 
of five digits, which are sub-equal and have strong claws, with a horny spur 
on the inner side of the hind foot, in addition to the elongation of the snout 
region into a kind of beak. In other respects the differences are very marked. 

The Platypus is covered with a fine close fur. The upper jaw is not unlike 
the beak of a Duck in general appearance, and is covered with a hairless, 
leathery-looking integument, which is developed into a free flap at the base 
\n front of the eyes. Both fore and hind limbs are short, and each comprises 
Hve digits connected by a web of skin, but provided with strong claws, 
so that they are adapted both for swimming and for burrowing. In the 
male there is a sharp horny spur, provided with a gland, on the inner side 
of the foot. The tail is long and furry. 

The Spiny Ant-eater {Echidna), on the other hand, has the upper surface 
of the body covered with strong pointed spines like those of a Hedgehog, 
hut larger, with coarse hairs in between. The snout is very narrow and the 
tail is rudimentary. The digits, which are specially powerful in the fore feet, 
are not connected by webs. 

Echidna and Ornithorhynchus are both animals the study of which in 
their native haunts is difficult. Their habits are nocturnal, and they remain 
for the most part securely concealed during the day. The food of Echidna 
under natural conditions consists of ants, for the capture of which its long 
and narrow tongue is spfcijilly adapted. It possesses no truce of teeth at any 



212 Federal Handbook. 



stage. During the day it is rarely seen in the open, hiding away in holes 
among rocks or about the roots of trees. If alarmed during its rare 
wanderings abroad in the day-time it rapidly buries itself by burrowing 
downwards. 

The Platypus spends most of its active life in fresh-wate pools and 
streams, swimming and diving with dexterity, and seeking its food, in the 
shape of molluscs, insect-larvse, and the like, among the water-weeds, using 
its beak as a Duck uses its bill for seeking out such objects, which are then 
stored in cheek-pouches, to be afterwards crushed between the broad horny 
plates that do duty for teeth in the adult. The Platypus, like Echidna, 
is hard to find even in districts where it is abundant, since it retires during 
the day to a burrow excavated in the banks of the stream, and, when in the 
water, shows very little above the surface. 

Though the adult Platypus has no teeth, well-developed teeth are formed 
in the young, and persist for a considerable time. The peculiar structure of 
these teeth has led to the conclusion, already referred to, that the nearest 
known relatives of the Monotremes are the extinct Mesozoic and Lower 
Eocene Multituherculata. 

OrniiJwrhynchus and Echidna are oviparous. Echidna produces usually 
only one egg in a season ; this it carries about and iucubates in a temporarily- 
formed pouch into which the ducts of the mammary glands open, and, after 
the young Echidna is hatched, it is carried about in the pouch for a considerable 
time. 

The Platypus has no pouch, and the two eggs usually produced are 
deposited in the interior of the burrow, where the young are hatched. 

Both Platypus and Echidna are still fairly abundant in some parts of the 
Commonwealth, though the numbers of the former have been reduced owing 
to the demand for their pelts, which are highly valued. Both are, nominally 
at least, protected by legislative enactment. Neither can be said to be in 
any immediate danger of extinction ; and, owing to the disappearance of 
the aboriginals, formerly their chief enemies, in most districts, the Echidnas 
are probably rather increasing than diminishing in numbers in some parts. 
Echidna ranges over all parts of the Continent, Tasmania, and parts of New 
Guinea. 

(b) The Marsupials. 

The Australian region is peculiarly the home of the Marsupials at the 
present day, and in it, as has been frequently pointed out, owing to their 
having remained for a long period practically undisturbed by aggression 
or competition at the hands of the higher orders, they have been able to adapt 
themselves to a great variety of widely differing modes of life. These adapta- 
tions have resulted in the evolution of a number of families which show a 
distinct parallelism to certain of the groups of the Eutheria or higher Mammals. 
Thus the Kangaroos and Wallabies, herbivorous Mammals with the limbs 
adapted for swift locomotion on the ground, are the Marsupial parallels 
of the Deer and other Euminants. The arboreal Phalangers and Koalas 
may be compared to the arboreal Lemurs and Monkeys. The Flying Pha- 
langers are comparable to the Flying Squirrels. The Bandicoots, on the one 
hand, and the Wombats on the other, mimic some of the famiUes of Eodents. 
The carnivorous Native Cats, Tasmanian Devil, and Thylacine parallel some 



Animal Life of Australia. 213 

of the groups of the true Cartiivora, wliile the Moles among the Insectivora 
find an analogue among the Marsupials in the Notoryctes or Marsupial Mole 
of the Australian desert. 

When we take this high degree of specialization into account, it is difficult 
to believe that the Marsupials are a degenerate race. Yet some of the 
zoologists who have given most attention to the subject are of the opinion 
that the existing members of the order have been derived from ancestors more 
highly organized than themselves in certain important respects. One part of 
the evidence on which this view is founded is concerned with the dentition. 
Germs of three sets of teeth are developed in young Marsupials ; but of these 
three sets of germs only one gives rise to a set of fully-formed teeth — the teeth 
of the adult. If the latter are the persistent milk-teeth, as some com- 
parative anatomists suppose, then one of the sets that remain undeveloped 
may be regarded as corresponding to the permanent teeth of higher Mammals ; 
and, should this be correct, then degeneration, as regards the teeth, has 
certainly taken place in the Marsupials. But the presence of the two 
abortive sets of tooth-germs does not necessarily point to such a conclusion ; 
it may very well be interpreted as pointing not to degeneration from higher 
Mammals, but to progressive development from lower forms in which three, 
or more, sets of teeth succeeded one another during the life of the animal. 

Another fact that has been looked upon as favouring the theory of de- 
generation is the singular one that only one Marsupial, so far as known, 
— the Bandicoot, Perameles, as discovered by J. P. Hill — has a true or allantoic 
placenta, such as is universally present, as the organ for the absorption of 
nutriment by the unborn young, in all higher Mammals without exception. 
The explanation of this anomaly afforded by a theory of degeneration — 
viz., that Marsupials in general once possessed a placenta, and that it has 
become degenerated and lost in all except Perameles is, however, not the 
only one that might be given. Almost as well might one argue that since 
among the Lizards one form, viz., Seps, has an allantoic placenta, all the 
others have previously possessed this structure, but have lost it as a result 
of degeneration. It is perhaps quite as probable that the placenta has been 
independently evolved in the Marsupials and in the ancestors of the higher 
Mammals. 

A third fact that has been supposed to point to degeneration is that the oldest 
known extinct Australian Marsupial, Wynyardia, described by Baldwin Spencer 
from deposits of Eocene age in Tasmania, has a cranial cavity, and presumably 
possessed a brain, larger in proportion than those of the living forms. 

The Marsupials are divisible into two main sections or sub-orders — the 
Diprotodontia and the Polyprotodontia. The Diprotodontia have two large 
incisor teeth in the lower jaw, and usually six (three on each side) in the 
upper ; and they all have the second and third toes (usually much smaller 
than the others) united by a web of skin (syndactylous) ; while the Polypro- 
todontia, which are carnivorous or insectivorous for the most part, have 
numerous incisors (four or five pairs) in the upper jaw, and rather fewer in 
the lower, and, with the exception of the Bandicoots, are not syndactylous. 

If we leave out of account the doubtful case of the South American 
Ccenolestes and allied extinct forms from the Santa Cruz beds of Patagonia, 
the Diprotodonts are exclusively Australian at the present time, and there 



214 Fedetial "Randbook. 



is no evidence tliat they ever existed in any other region. There are three 
families of Diprotodonts — the Kangaroo family {MacropodidcE), the Wombat 
family {PhascolomyidcB) and the Phalanger family (PhalangeridcE). The 
first includes, in addition to the Kangaroos, the Tree Kangaroos, the Wallabies, 
the Rock Wallabies, Hare-Wallabies, and Rat-Kangaroos, ranging in length 
of head and body from 5 ft. 5 in. in the case of the large Kangaroos, down to 
10 inches in the case of the Musk Rat {Hijjjsiprymnodon moschatus). There 
are at least foyr species of Kangaroos {i.e., of the large species of Macropus) 
inhabiting chiefly the more central parts of the various States, and two of 
them also occurring in small numbers in the arid Central Australia. The 
commonest is the Giant Kangaroo [Macropus gigas) which does not extend 
to Central Australia, but is found all over the rest of the Continent, except 
the far north, a variety of the species, now very rare, occurring also in 
Tasmania. 

The Wombats {PhascolomyidcB), thick-set in body, short in legs, practi- 
cally tailless, and clumsy in movement, contrast strongly with the agile and 
graceful Kangaroos and Wallabies. Their front teeth are very rodent-like, 
and they have been not inaptly described as resembling Beavers in general 
appearance without the well-developed tails of the latter animals. The 
short and very stout limbs are provided with powerful claws, which enable 
the animal to excavate large burrows in which it usually lies hidden during 
the day-time. It employs its burrowing powers also in procuring the roots 
of ferns and other plants which form the staple of its food. The most widelv 
distributed species is Phascolomys mitchelli, which is found in New Soutli 
Wales, Victoria, and South Australia. A second species {P. ursinus) is 
confined to Tasmania and the islands of Bass Strait, while a third (P. latijrons) 
occurs in South Australia. 

The family Phalangeridw includes, in addition to the Phalangers, almost 
universally known as " Opossums " in Australia, the Koala or Native Bear. 
Of the latter there is only a single species {Phascolarctus cinereus) which is 
common all over Eastern Australia. It is almost as completely arboreal 
in its habits as the Sloth, which it resembles also in its slow and deliberate 
movements. Both hand and foot are prehensile, and the digits are provided 
with strong curved claws ; the tail is vestigial. The food of the Koala is 
composed almost exclusively of leaves of Eucalypti. During the day it 
usually rests asleep in a forked branch. 

The Phalangers are slighter in the body than the Koala, and have similar 
prehensile limbs, but are provided with a long tail which is usually prehensile. 
The commonest species is Trichosurus vidpecula, which is found over all 
Australia with the exception of the Cape York District. The common Tas- 
manian Opossum is a somewhat larger variety of the same species with darker 
and thicker fur. A second species — the Short-eared Opossum — T. caninus 
— is not so widely distributed, being found in Southern Queensland, New 
South Wales, parts of Victoria, Tasmania, and the islands of Bass Straits. 

The Ring-tailed Opossums {Pseudochirus) are similar to the Opossums, 
but smaller. The Flying Opossums (" Fl}ang Squirrels ") differ from the 
Opossums in the possession, like the true Flpng Squirrels, of a fold of skin 
extending on each side of the body from fore limb to hind limb, and forming 
a parachute enabling the animal to glide through the air fi'om one branch 



Animal Life of Australia. 215 



of a tree to another. Of these the largest is the Greater Flying Opossum 
(Petauroides volans), which occurs throughout Eastern Australia. The 
smallest is the Pigmy Flying Opossum {Acrobates pi/gmains), of about the 
size of a mouse. 

Also mouse-like in size and general appearance is the Long-snouted 
Pouched Mouse {Tarsipes rostratus) which is peculiar among the Marsupials 
in feeding with the aid of its long tongue on the honey of flowers as well as 
on insects. Tarsipes has only been found in Western Australia. 

One of the rarest and most interesting of the Australian Pohjprotodonts 
is the little Banded Ant-eater {Myrmecobius fasciatus) of South and Western 
Australia. Of the size of a large Rat, the Banded Ant-eater has a slender 
squirrel-like body, a pointed snout with a long narrow tongue, well-developed 
claws on the five digits of the fore foot and the four of the hind foot, and a 
long bushy tail. The coarse, reddish fur of the upper surface is crossed by 
eight or nine light transverse bands. The teeth are remarkable on account 
both of their great number — 62 altogether, a larger number than in any 
other living land Mammal — -and of the close resemblance between them and the 
teeth of certain of the oldest known fossil Mammals, the remains of which have 
been found in European Jurassic beds. Though a Marsupial in all other 
essential respects, Myrmecobius is devoid of the characteristic pouch or 
marsupium which occurs in all the rest of the Australian members of the 
order. 

Of the family Dasyuridce the Native Cats (genus Dasyarus) comprise 
five species of carnivorous, marten-like, partly terrestrial, partly arboreal 
Marsupials, the largest of which, the Tiger-cat {Dasyuriis maculatus) is 
about 3J feet in total length. They have all brownish or yellowish-grey fur 
with white spots. The most widely-distributed of the Native Cats is 
Dasyurus viverrinus, which occurs in New South Wales, Victoria, South 
Australia, and Tasmania. A number of smaller, rat-like or mouse-like 
forms are also comprised in the family. 

To the same family are also referred the Tasmanian Devil and the Thyla- 
cine. The Tasmania Devil {Sarcophilus ursinus), now confined to Tasmania, 
but formerly — ^probably at a period when Tasmania was a peninsula — living 
also i;i continental Australia, is a fierce little animal which in general appear- 
ance, with its thick snout and thick-set body, has been compared to a small 
Bear. The limbs are like those of the Native Cats, but stronger, with five 
clawed digits in the fore and four in the hind foot. The fur is black, with 
sundry patches of white. 

The Thylacine or Tasmanian Wolf {Thylacinus cynocephalus), like Sarco- 
philus, is now confined to Tasmania, though formerly occurring on the 
mainland. Thylacinus is a large dog-like carnivorous Marsupial of a grey 
colour, with a number of transverse blackish stripes on the hinder part of 
the body. It is said to find its nearest relatives in certain fossil forms {Fro- 
thylacinus and others), in the Santa Cruz beds of Patagonia. Both the Devil 
and the Wolf have been driven back to the very wildest and roughest parts 
of Tasmania, and are becoming very scarce. 

The Bandicoot family {Peramelido}) are Polyprotodonts which resemble 
the Diprotodonts in having the second and third toes of the hind foot syn- 
dactylous, i.e., united together by a web of skin. They are rabbit-like. 



216 Federal Handbook, 



burrowing, omnivorous, with two or three of the middle digits of the fore 
foot long and clawed, the others rudimentaiy ; with the first toe (hallux) 
of the hind foot absent or rudimentary, the second and third slender and 
united, the fourth the largest, with a large claw, and the fifth smaller ; the 
tail narrow and sometimes bare like that of a Rat, sometimes scantily haired, 
sometimes provided with a brush of long hairs. 

The common Bandicoots belong to the genus Perameles, of which there 
are six species, the most widely distributed being P. obesula, occurring all over 
Australia south of the Tropics and in Tasmania. Bandicoots are extremely 
common in some parts of the country, even in the neighbourhood of large 
towns. They are not frequently seen, as they hide away dm-ing the day ; 
but traces of their presence in localities where they abound are usually to be 
observed in the shape of the numerous shallow burrows which they excavate 
in search of the roots and the earthworms and grubs which constitute their 
chief food. 

The Rabbit Bandicoot {Peragale lagotis) occurs in South and Western 
Australia and in the Centre. The name is derived from the long ears, which 
are not unlike those of a rabbit or a hare. Still rarer is the Pig-footed Bandi- 
coot {ChcBropus castanotis), also with prominent ears and with very slender 
feet ; it is confined to the far-inland parts of the continent. 

Of all the Polyprotodonts the most remarkably modified is the little 
Marsupial Mole [Notoryctes typJilops) of Central Australia. The head and 
trunk together are about 6 inches long, the head passing into the trunk 
without definite neck : the trunk is flattened, the surface covered with a soft 
silky fur. The snout is protected above by a hard horny shield, and the 
tail, which is short, is enclosed in a hardened integument marked with a 
number of rings. The eyes are quite vestigial and functionless ; the ear has 
no pinna. The limbs are short and powerful, with five digits in each, all 
provided with claws, those of the third and fourth digits of the fore foot 
being enormously developed. Notoryctes does not seem to form per- 
manent burrows, but moves along under the surface through loose sand 
with marvellous speed. Its food consists mainly of ants captured under- 
ground. 

The only Marsupials now living outside the Australian region are the 
Marsupials of America ; and these belong, with only one exception, to a 
family of Polyprotodonts, the DidelphyidcB, or Opossums, which are not 
represented in Australia either in the living or the fossil condition. The one 
exception is a small rat-like animal — Ccenolestes — found in Bolivia and 
Ecuador. This has some claims to be regarded as a Diprotodont of the same 
type as the Diprotodonts of Australia : but the resemblances may perhaps 
be ascribable rather to convergent evolution than to near relationship. The 
upper teeth of Ccenolestes are Polyprotodont, while the lower are Diprotodont, 
and the skull does not show special Diprotodont features. There is no 
syndactylism. 

The Cretaceous mammalian remains known as Triconodonts and Tri- 
tuberculates may have been Marsupials ; but the evidence for such a con- 
clusion is not complete, and, in any case, it is impossible to connect them 
definitely with any of the living Marsupial families. The only family of recent 
Marsupials which has a history traceable with any degree of certainty back 



Animal Life of Australia. 217 

to the Mesozoic period is the DidelphyidcB of America. Remains of Marsupials 
belonging to this family, or of forms regarded on good evidence as having 
been its precursors, occur in Cretaceous beds in North America. In the Ter- 
tiary of Europe and of North Amierica the DidelphyidcB were represented 
by many species scarcely, if at all, to be distinguished from the living genus 
Didelphys. The European DidelphyidcB ranged from the Eocene through 
the Oligocene to the beginning of the Miocene, where they completely dis- 
appeared. In North America they became extinct in the Oligocene — those 
livmg in that country at the present day bemg evidently comparatively 
recent immigrr.nts from the south. 

In South America the Didelphyid stock appears to have been abundantly 
represented by small forms {Microhiotheridce) in the Miocene of the Santa 
Cruz beds of Patagonia ; but is probably to be traced much further back, 
to the Upper Cretaceous or lowest Eocene, on the evidence of a single fossil 
(Proteodidelphys) . 

In the Santa Cruz beds, in addition to a number of forms of small Mar- 
supials {Epanorthidce , Abderitidcp, Cccnolestidce), more or less nearly allied 
to the living Ccenolestes, is a family of Polyprotodonts {Sparassodontidce, 
including Prothylacinus), which seem to find their nearest allies in the living 
Tasmanian Thylacine. 

In Pleistocene times Australia was populated with Marsupials, many of 
which belonged to genera that still survive, others to extinct genera referable 
to existing families. Many of both types were of gigantic size, the largest of 
the extinct genera being Diprotodon, Nototherium, and Thylacoleo. Dipro- 
todon, the largest Marsupial known, was intermediate in its structure between 
the Phalangers and Kangaroos. AH these Pleistocene forms were definitely 
Diprotodont or definitely Polyjjrotodont. Wynyardia, from an older horizon, 
seems to have resembled the South American Csenolestoids in combining 
Diprotodont and Polyprotodont features. 

South America and Australia have thus been, so far as known, the sole 
centres of Marsupial evolution since the primitive Didelphyid stock became 
extinct in Europe and North America. And it seems to be clearly established, 
in view of the relationships between the Marsupial fauna, living and extinct, 
of South America and that of Australia, that at some period antecedent 
to the Pliocene, Australia and South America were in much closer connection 
than they are at the present day. If we leave the case of Thylacinus and the 
Sparassodonts out of account as at present undetermined, the main body 
of the evidence seems to point not to any direct derivation of the one fauna 
trom the other, but rather to their origination in a common centre, the 
spreading out from this, east and west, of the two sets of primitive forms 
destined to give rise respectively to the American and to Austialian Marsupial 
fauna, the eventual complete geographical separation of the two with the 
disappearance of the centre of origin, their arrival in South America and 
Australia respectively, and their further evolution there since Miocene times. 
Whether the primitive forms reached the original, now long submerged, 
centre of dispersal through South America or through Austialia remains an 
open question. The absence of Marsupials and Marsupial remains in Asia, 
and the absence of any trace of Didelphyoid forms in Australian deposits 
would seem to point rather to the former conclusion. 



218 Federal Handbook. 



(c) Non=MarsupiaI Mammals. 

The Dingo or Native Dog {Canis dingo) is one of the few indigenous 
Mammals of Australia that are not Marsupials. The Dingo is a wild dog of 
about the size of a collie, which ranges all over continental Australia in the 
less frequented districts, and, hunting singly, or in twos and threes, or small 
bands of five or six, works much devastation among the flocks and herds 
and in the poultry runs. The Dingo is frequently reared from puppyhood 
by the aborigines, but never becomes really tamed or fully domesticated, 
and, though clever in finding and tracking game of all kinds, is not of much 
direct vise to its masters. 

Remains of the Dingo have been found mixed with the bones of extinct 
Marsupials — Diprotodon, Nototherium, and Tliylacoleo — so that it is an ancient 
inhabitant of the country — much more ancient than Man, so far as existing 
evidence shows. 

It is a remarkable fact that the Dingo does not occur in Tasmania, and 
never seems to have reached that country, since no remains of it have been 
found there, though it flourished on the mainland perhaps even at the time 
when Tasmania was not an island, but a peninsula. The survival of the 
Thylacine and Sarcophilus in Tasmania is doubtless due to this circumstance, 
since on the mainland these carnivorous Marsupials became extinct in 
Pleistocene times. 

Other non-marsupial Mammals are a number of species of Rats and Mice 
(genus Mus of the order Rodentia) and other rat-like Rodents. The largest 
of these is a Water-rat {Hydramys clirysog aster), which reaches a length of 
some 20 inches. Very curious in their adoption of an attitude and mode 
of progression similar to those of the Kangaroos and Wallabies are the so- 
called " Jerboa " Rats. The genus to which these belong (Conilurus) is 
peculiar to Australia, though other Rodent genera — the original Jer- 
boas — presenting a parallel modification, are distributed in Asia and 
Africa. 

Australia also contains a considerable number of Bats of various kinds 
(order Chiroptem). The largest of these are the widely-distributed Fruit- 
eating Bats or Flying Foxes [Pteropodidce), a family which also occurs in 
Africa and Southern Asia, as well as in Fiji and Samoa. These large Bats, 
(popularly known as " Flying Foxes " on account of their Fox -like heads and 
reddish fur), with a spread of wings of about 3 to 5 feet, are capable of swift 
and prolonged flight, and travel long distances from their diurnal haunts 
in remote gorges in the mountains to their feeding grounds in districts where 
fruit is to be obtained. During the day they rest suspended by their claws 
from branches of trees with the head downwards, congregating together 
in " camps " or " rookeries " sometimes containing thousands of individuals. 
At dusk they fly abroad in search of food, and often work great havoc in 
orchards. 

Of the Insectivorous Bats some twenty-five species are represented in 
Australia, a few being forms of wide distribution, while the rest are confined to 
Australia, and in many cases to particular parts of the Commonwealth. 
One genus, Rhinonycteris, represented by a single species, seems to be 
confined to North and North-west Australia. 



Animal Life of Australia. 219 



3. Birds. 

The Bird fauna of Australia is exceedingly rich both in regard to the 
total number of species (about 800), the high proportion of endemic forms, 
and the number of interesting and peculiar groups. Here Alfred Eussell 
Wallace may be quoted. He writes {Geographical Distribution of Animals, 
vol. I., p. 391), " The t}^ical Australian region is almost as well defined by 
its birds as by its mammalia ; but in this case the deficiencies are less con- 
spicuous, while the peculiar and characteristic families are numerous and 
important. The most marked deficiency as regards widespread families, 
is the total absence of Fringillidse (True Finches), Picidse (Woodpeckers), 
Vulturidfe (Vultures), and Phasianidse* (Pheasants), and among prevalent 
Oriental groups, Pycnonotidae (Bulbuls), Phyllornithidae (Green Bulbuls), 
and Megalaemidse (Barbets), are families whose absence is significant." 

No fewer than five families of birds are to all intents and purposes con- 
fined to the Australian region ; and a number of others, though not so 
restricted, are so specially developed in it as to constitute striking features 
of the fauna. Of the families practically restricted to the region two of the 
most interesting are those of the Cassowaries {Casuariidce) and Emus 
{DromceidcB). The Australian Cassowary {Casicarius australis) is confined 
to Northern Queensland, while the Emu [Drommus novce hollandice) is of 
wide distribution in continental Australia, but the Tasmanian form {D. 
diemenensis) became extinct about half-a-century ago. Another species 
of Emu {D. parvulus) lived on Kangaroo Island, ofi St. Vincent's Gulf, and 
the bones of yet another {D. minor) have been found on King Island in 
Bass Strait. Emus have been di'iven back by settlement and cultivation, 
and have become extirpated in many districts in which they were once 
abundant. But they are still numerous enough in the plains and open 
forest country in many parts of the continent, though in order to see them 
in any abundance it is necessary to travel far back from the more populous 
centres. 

This characteristic bird is almost too well known to require description. 
Though larger than the Cassowary, it is much smaller than the African 
Ostrich, the full-grown bird reaching a height of about 5 feet. The Emu and 
the Cassowary both differ from the Ostrich in the possession of three toes 
instead of only two, and in the absence of the characteristic large plumes 
on the wings and tail, all the contour-feathers being long, narrow, and forked. 
The Emus do not possess the prominent helmet-like excrescence present on 
the head of the Cassowary, and also are devoid of the wattles and brightlv- 
coloured naked spaces on the neck. Emus go in pairs except after the breediutr 
season, when a number may congregate together. They feed largely on 
grasses and herbage, and on roots and fruits. In spring the eggs are laid 
to the number of as many as forty in a hollow made in the ground or in u 
loosely-constructed nest. The dark-green eggs are familiar objects in the 
shops of dealers in curiosities. 

Another peculiar family of birds almost confined to the Australian ie<Tion 
is that of the Mound Birds or Megapodes {Megapodiidm). These are birds 
not unlike the domestic turkey in size and general appearance, with verv 

• The Phasianiice, as the family is now defined, are, however, represented by certain Quails {Coturnix 
and others). 



220 Federal Handbook. 



strong aud large feet. Unlike other birds, the Megapodes do not sit on their 
eggs in order to maintain the temperature necessary for incubation ; but 
scrape together masses of earth or sand mingled with decaying vegetable 
matter, deposit the eggs as they are laid in depressions excavated in this 
mass, cover them over and leave them to be hatched by the agency of the 
heat generated by the decomposition of the organic matter. The young 
birds, as soon as they are hatched, are able to scramble out of the mound and 
shift for themselves. The Brush-Turkey {Catheturus lathami) and the Mallee 
Hen {Lipoa ocellata) represent this family, the former in the east and north- 
east, the latter in the south and west of the continent. Another species, 
the Scrub Fowl {Megapodius tumulus), occurs in Northern Queensland, 
but is found also distributed through New Guinea and a part of the Malay 
Archipelago. Another {Catheturus purpureicollis) occurs in the Cape York 
Peninsula. The family is not represented in Tasmania. Though characteris- 
tic of Australia, the Mound-Birds are not confined to it, extending to the east 
as far as Samoa, to the west as far as the Nicobar Islands, and to the north 
as far as the Philippines and Ladrones. The nearest known relatives of the 
Megapodes — structurally closely allied to them — are the Curassows {Cracidce) 
of Central and South America. 

The Pigeon family (ColumbidcB), though not numerous when compared 
with their representatives in certain other regions, yet form an important 
element of the bird-fauna. Conspicuous among them for brightness and 
beauty of colouration, in which they almost rival the Parrot tribe, are the 
Fruit Pigeons (Ptilopus), mostly denizens of the tropical districts of the 
north. Other typical forms are the Top-knot Pigeon (Lopholcemus ant- 
arcticus), the little Doves of the genus Geopelia, the Bronze-wings {Phaps 
chalcoptera and P. elegans) and the Wonga {Leucosarcia picata). 

The great development of the Parrot group constitutes one of the most 
striking and characteristic features of the Australian avi-fauna. Three 
families (or sub-families) are peculiar to the Australian region, and are for 
the most part confined to Australia itself. Conspicuous among these is the 
family of the Cockatoos {Cacatuidce), which occurs outside Australia only 
in the Philippine and Sulu Islands. Of these, the White Cockatoo [Cacatua 
galerita), with yellow crest and ear-coverts, is found practically all over 
Australia and Tasmania, but does not penetrate to the far interior of the 
continent. Leadbeater's, or the Pink Cockatoo (C leadbeateri), which has a 
red crest banded with yellow and with a white tip, and has a flush of rose 
colour over the head and breast, is confined to far inland districts of the 
continent. The widely distributed Galah or Eose-breasted Cockatoo (C. 
roseicapilla) is rose-coloured below and grey above. 

Several species of the genus Calyptorhynchus, of varying distribution, are 
popularly known as Black Cockatoos on account of the prevailing blackness^ 
of their plumage. Of these, the commonest are C. hanksii, with a red band 
across the tail, and C. funereus, with a yellow band in the same place and a 
yellow tuft on the ears. 

The largest of the Cockatoo tribe is the Great Black Cockatoo {Microglossus 
aterrimus), which extends from Northern Queensland to New Guinea and the 
Aru Islands, the uniform greyish-black of whose colouring is only relieved 
by the red and yellow of naked patches on the cheeks. The smallest, the 



Animal Life of Australia. 22] 

Cockatoo Parakeet {Calopsittacus novce hollandice), which is of a dark-grey 
with a grey and yellow crest, occurs over Australia generally, but is rare in 
the coastal districts. A little larger is the Gang-gang {CaUocephalon galeatum), 
a grey bird with a thick crest, which is scarlet in the male, grey in the female. 

The Brush-tongued Lories {TrichoglossidcB) are a second peculiar family 
of Australian Parrots extending to New Guinea, Celebes, Timor, and the 
New Hebrides. Of these, the best known is the gorgeously-coloured Blue- 
bellied Lorikeet {Trichoglossus novce hollandice), which is of common occur- 
rence in Eastern Australia and Tasmania, where it is often to be seen flying 
about in flocks and feeding on the honey of the flowers of the Eucal}'3)ts 
and of other trees and shrubs, and on various seeds. The prevailing colours 
of this brilliantly-coloured bird are blue and red, with the head and the centre 
of the under surface green and with a yellow band round the neck. 

Belonging to a more widely distributed family is the " Budgeraga " 
{Melopsittacus undulatus), very familiar as a cage bird, little larger than a 
Sparrow, with green and yellow feathers bearing black markings, a yellow 
head, with three black spots and a band of blue on the cheek and a streak 
of blue in the middle of the tail. The King Parrot {Aprosniictus cyanopygius), 
which ranges over Queensland, New South Wales, and Victoria, is a large 
handsome Parrot with the head, neck, and under-surface brilliant scarlet, 
and the back and wings green. 

Probably the commonest of the Australian Parrots, as well as among 
the most beautiful in colouration, are certain species of the genus Platy- 
cercus and its allies, commonly known as Parrakeets. Conspicuous among 
these are the Rosella (Platycercus eximius) and Pennant's Parakeet {P. 
elegans) . 

The Lyre-birds {Menuridce) are restricted to the Australian continent. 
The Superb Lyre-bird {Menura superba), of New South Wales and Southern 
Queensland, and M. Victorice of Eastern Victoria and South-eastern New 
South Wales have in the adult male the ornamental lyre-like tail to which these 
birds owe their popular name. They are large birds of about the size of a 
pheasant, which, though well able to fly, live largely on the ground. They are 
exceedingly shy and difficult to approach, running away rapidly when ap- 
proached, but if greatly startled, as by the bark of a dog, they will spring 
up into a low branch of a tree. The Lyre-birds are wonderful mimics, 
imitating very cleverly the cries of other birds, as well as any other sounds 
that come within their hearing. 

The Honey-eaters {Meliphagidce) are, perhaps, on the whole, the most 
interesting of all the peculiar families of Australian birds on account of their 
great abundance, their grace of form and movement, and the variety of their 
notes and cries. The Meliphagidce are represented as far north as Bali, 
and as far south as New Zealand, but they have their head-quarters in Aus- 
tralia, where they find abundance of food in the honey-producing blossoms 
of the Myrtaceous trees (such as Eucalypts and Ti-trees), the prevalence of 
which is so characteristic of the vegetation. The food of the Honey-eaters 
does not, however, consist exclusively of honey ; the small insects that 
frequently abound about the flowers are also devoured, and are often found 
to constitute a large proportion of the bulk of the contents of the crop, and 
in many cases various fruits also contribute to the bird's diet. The largest 



222 Federal Handbook. 



members of the family, such as the Friar-bird {Philemon corniculatus), with 
its bare leathery -skinned head, and the Gill-bird (Acanthochcera caruncuiata), 
with its pair of appendages (" wattles " or " gills ") at the sides of the head, 
are of about the size of a thrush ; the smallest, such as the scarlet and black 
Blood-stained Honey-eater {Myzomela saiiguinolenta) and the Spine-bill 
[Acanthorliynclius temiirostris) are no larger than the largest humming-birds, 
which they resemble in their habit of inserting the long slender bill into the 
tube of a flower while hovering in the air. 

The Scrub-birds {AtrichornithidcB) are also a family of birds peculiar to 
Australia, remarkable, like the Lyi'e-birds, for their power of mimicking the 
notes of other birds. 

The Birds of Paradise (Paradiseidce) are represented by their most 
characteristic and beautiful forms in New Guinea and the Aru Islands. In 
Australia they have for their representatives the Rifle-birds, for the most 
part restricted to Northern Queensland, and the Bower-birds, Regent-birds, 
Satin-birds, and Cat-birds. All of these except the Rifle-birds have the 
curious habit of constructing '' bowers " or play-grounds, which they orna- 
ment in various ways with feathers, bones, shells, berries, lichens, and mosses. 
Structurally the Bower-birds are most nearly related to the sombre-plumaged 
Crows ; but the male attire of all of them, though much less gorgeous than 
that of the true Birds of Paradise, shows some tendency to brilliancy. This 
in the Bower-bird {Chlamydodera nuchalis) is limited to a band of lilac 
on the neck relieving the quiet brown and grey of the rest of the surface. 
The male Satin-bird {Ptilorhynchus violaceus) has a uniform coat of glistening 
purplish-black. The Regent-bird {Sericulus melinus) has its black plumage 
ornamented with bright orange on the head, neck, and wings. The Cat- 
bird {Aeluredus viridis) is bright green diversified by white markings, with 
a dash of blue on the back. 

Of families (or sub-families) of birds not strictly confined to Australia, 
though forming important characteristic constituents of its fauna, mention 
should be made of the Thick-heads {Pachycephalidce), the Caterpillar-shrikes 
(CampepJiagidce), the Wood-swallows {Artamidce), and the Weaver-finches 
(Ploceidce). The Thick-heads, which are Polynesian as well as Australian 
(also Tenasserim and the Sunda Islands), are active Shrike-like birds which 
feed chiefly on insects. Various species of Pachycephala are very common 
birds over nearly all Australia, and are distinguished by the black band 
round the neck and the yellow or red breast. Falcunculus frontatus, the 
Crested Shrike, of the same family, which has also a black neck-band with a 
yellow breast, has a crest or tuft of feathers on the black head. 

In connexion with the Shrikes mention must be made of two members 
of that group which are among the commonest and most conspicuous birds 
in all parts of Australia. These are the so-called " Magpies " {Gymnorhina) 
and " Magpie Larks " {Grallina). Of the Magpies there are five species, of 
which the most widely distributed is the Black-backed Magpie {G. tibicen). 
Protected by law on account of the good work they do in the destruction 
of grubs and caterpillars, which, with small lizards, form their principal food — 
though by no means immaculate as regards fruit and cereal crops — these 
handsome birds, with their striking black-and-white plumage, are very 
abundant even in the most closely-settled parts. Their natural song is very 



Animal Life of Australia. 223 

musical, clear, and flute-like ; they are excellent mimics, and when tamed 
they can easily be taught to whistle a bar or two of a simple air. 

The Magpie Lark [Grallina picata), distributed all over Australia, except 
in the most arid parts, is a much smaller bird than the Magpie, which it 
resembles in its black-and-white plumage. It utters a monotonous sharp 
cry in two longish notes, from the sound of which it is in many districts 
known as the " Pee- wee." 

Another family of Shrike-like birds specially developed in Australia is 
that of the Campephagidce (Cuckoo Shrikes or Caterpillar Shrikes). The 
various species of the genus Graucalus belonging to this family are very 
common biids in the bush in most parts of Australia. They are recognisable 
as large birds with broad bUls, with the plumage of french grey, marked 
about the head and throat with black, and with variously distributed white 
patches. 

The family of the Wood-swallows {Artamidce) are not by any means 
confined to Australia, having representatives both in India and in West 
Africa. The genus Artamus comprises half-a-dozen species, of which the 
most widely distributed is the common Wood-swallow {A. tenebrosus or 
sordidus), birds of sombre colouration, not unlike true Swallows — from 
which they differ widely in essentials — in general appearance and mode of 
flight, but with the bill long and curved instead of short and wide, and with 
the wings less elongated. 

Mention may here be made of the Shrike-Robins or Yellow-breasted 
Robins of the genus EopsaUria, which is peculiar to Australia, New Guinea, 
the Aru Islands, and New Caledonia. E. australis, a very tame bird, frequently 
seen in town gardens, is very common in New South Wales and Victoria, 
and allied species take its place in other parts. The Yellow-breasted Robins 
are usually classed with the Fly-catchers {MuscimpidoE). 

Also familiarly known as " Robins " are a number of other small birds, 
notably the various species of Petroeca, a genus which is mainly Australian 
in its distribution, though occurring also in New Zealand, the New Hebrides, 
Fiji, and Samoa. Most of the common species of Petroeca have bright 
scarlet breasts. P. goodenovii has also a patch of scarlet on the top of the 
head. 

The " Wrens " or " Warblers " of the genus Maluncs (classed, like the 
Yellow-breasted Robins, with the Flycatchers, and confined to Australia 
and New Guinea) are very attractive, tame little birds, common in gardens — 
the adult males with brilliant plumage of blue and black, or rod and 
black. 

Though true Finches {Fringiltidce) are entirely wanting in Australia, 
there are great numbers of the nearly related family of the Weaver Finches 
(Ploceidce), which are numerous also in Africa, Southern Asia, the Malay 
Archipelago, and tiio islands of the West Pacific. Many of these little birds 
are strikingly and brilliantly coloured, and, being easily captured, they are 
extensively kept as cage-birds. Of the eleven genera represented seven are 
confined to Australia. 

The Kingfisher family (Alcedinidce) , though abundant all over tli(> world, 
have their head-quarters in Australia. Those gigantic members of the group, 
the " Kookaburras " or " Laughing Jackasses " {Dacelo gigas and other 



224 Federal Handbook. 



species), range all over Australia, except over the more arid parts of the 
interior, where there is little bird-life of any kind. Outside Australia they 
occur only in Southern New Guinea. The common Kookaburra {Dxcelo 
gigas) extends over Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and South 
Australia. It is one of the largest of the Kingfisher tribe, with a total length 
of about 17 inches. A second species, Dcicelo leachii, occurs in Queensland 
and in the Northern Territory ; while a third, D. cervina, inhabits Western 
Australia, the Northern Territory, and the northern parts of Queensland. 
Kookaburras are not frequenters of streams like typical Kingfishers, and do 
not feed on fish. They are to be found in all parts of the bush — ^more especi- 
ally in the prevailing open forest country — and their food consists of lizards 
and snakes, small mammals and birds, and large insects, such as cicadas 
and locusts. Their most remarkable peculiarity is their extraordinary 
laughing cry, usually uttered in a duet or chorus, especially frequent 
and noisy at sunrise and sunset. Half-a-dozen Kingfishers of smaller size 
also occur. The commonest of these, the Sacred Kingfisher {Halcyon sanctus) 
is to be found all over Australia, and extends to New Guinea, Sumatra, and 
the New Hebrides. Like the Kookaburras, it is by no means confined 
to the neighbourhood of water, and it does not dive into water after fish, 
but feeds on insects and crustaceans, small lizards, and snakes. Some of the 
other species are typical Kingfishers in appearance and habits, and are 
seldom to be seen except along the course of streams. 

The Australian Birds of Prey, though numerous, present few characteristic 
features. The Australian Harriers, Goshawks, Sparrow Hawks, Eagles, 
Sea Eagles, Kites, Falcons, Kestrels, Ospreys, and Owls are not, save in small 
particulars, different from the corresponding birds of other regions, and 
belong to the same or to nearly related genera. Vultures are not represented. 
The largest Australian Bird of Prey is the Wedge-tailed Eagle, or " Eagle- 
hawk " {Aquila or UrocBtus audax), which is rather larger than the European 
Golden Eagle. This is by no means a rare bird ; in fact, its numbers some- 
times render it so formidable to the young lambs in pastoral districts that 
poisoning is resorted to, and large numbers are destroyed. On the other hand, 
the Wedge-tailed Eagle does a good work in destroying many rabbits. 
Unlike the Golden Eagle the Wedge-tailed Eagle is by no means averse to 
feeding on dead animals which are in a well-advanced stage of putridity. 

4. Reptiles. 

Of the Reptiles Australia possesses but a poor fauna so far as the Tor- 
toises {Chelonia) and Crocodiles {Crocodilia) are concerned, while the Lizards 
[Lacertilia) and Snakes {Ophidia) are much more numerous. The Tortoises 
all belong to a family, the Chelydidce, occurring elsewhere only in South 
America. The genus Chelodina comprises three species in Australia and one 
in New Guinea. Of the Australian species G. longicollis, the Long-necked 
Tortoise, inhabits the fresh waters of all the southern part of continental 
Australia. 

There are two species of Crocodile, both confined to the Tropics (Northern 
Queensland). One of these {Crocodilus porosics) which lives in estuaries and 
readily ventures out to sea, is a widely distributed Indian and Malayan 



Animal Life of Australia. 225 

species, which reaches an immense size in some of the rivers of North Queens- 
land. The other (C johnstoni), which does not reach a greater length than 
6 or 7 feet, is also confined to rivers of the tropical north, but does not go 
down into salt water. 

The Lizards of Australia are very numerous, but present few marked 
characters. Geckos and Skinks, generally distributed in other regions, are 
represented by a number of genera and species. Of the Skinks one charac- 
teristic form, which is distributed over the Australian continent, is the Shingle- 
back or Stump-tailed Lizard {Trachjsaurus riigosus), the only species of a 
genus which does not occur outside Australia. This was one of the few 
Australian animals noticed by Dampier in his famous visit to Western Aus- 
tralia in 1699. Another much commoner member of the Skink family is 
the large sluggish smooth-scaled Blue-tongue [Tiliqua scincoides). The 
commonest, small, long-tailed Lizards, with habits like those of the European 
species of Lacerta, are also members of the Skink family (various species of 
Lygosoma or Hinulia). 

Allied to the Skink tribe is a family of snake-like Lizards, the Pygopidce, 
entirely confined to Australia and Tasmania with, perhaps. New Guinea. 
They are limbless, or practically limbless, Lizards often mistaken for Snakes, 
and found in all parts, living in holes in the ground or under stones, and coming 
out to feed usually in the evenings. The largest of these snake-like forms are 
about 2 feet long. 

One of the families of Lizards best represented in the Australian fauna 
is that of the Agamidce, which contains a number of characteristic forms. 
One of its most remarkable members is the Frill Lizard {Chlamydosaurus 
Kingi), of Queensland and northern and north-western Australia. The most 
striking feature of this Lizard, which grows to 3 feet in length, is the wide 
frill-like flap of skin on either side of the neck, which the animal erects when 
alarmed, by means of long rib-like extensions of the hyoid apparatus. The 
Frill-lizard when pursued runs in a semi-erect position on the hind limbs 
with the fore limbs clear of the ground ; but soon turns at bay, spreading 
out the frill to its full extent, and opening its mouth widely, at the same time 
emitting a peculiar hissing sound which adds to the alarming effect of its 
attitude. 

Belonging to the same family are the various species of Amphibolurus or 
" Dragons," a genus confined to Australia. These are small-scaled Lizards 
with extremely long narrow tail, and frequently with crests or rows of spines 
along the back. One of the largest is the widely-distributed Jew Lizard 
(A. harhatus), which reaches 21 inches in length, and owes its specific name to 
the possession of a fringe of spines (" beard ") behind the ears and on the 
lower jaw. A striking ally of these is the Water Dragon {Physignathus 
lesueuri), which may be 3 feet in length, and has an elongated compressed tail, 
and a prominent crest along the neck and back. The Water Dragon is very 
common along the banks of creeks in the whole of Eastern Australia. The 
genus occurs also in New Guinea and neiglibouiiiig islands, in Siam, and in 
Cochin China. 

The most grotesque of all the Agamida) is Moloch horridus of Western 
Australia, which, with its spiny head and body, has a curious superficial 
C. 12154. P 



226 Federal Handbook. 



resemblance to the misleadingly-named " Horned Toads " of North America, 
members of a family of Lizards, the Iguanidae, not represented at all in Aus- 
tralia. 

The largest of all the Australian Lizards, and one of the best known and 
most widely distributed, is Varanus gouldi, the Lace Lizard, often termed 
" Iguana " or " Goana," which sometimes reaches a length of 5 feet. This 
Lizard has nothing to do with the true Iguanas, which are an essentially 
American group ; but belongs to the family of the Monitors (Varanidce), 
which are of very wide occurrence. It is a long-tailed, long-necked Lizard, 
blackish brown above, with yellow spots on the body and yellow rings round 
the tail, yellow below. The Lace Lizard lives much in trees, which it climbs 
in search of the eggs and nestlings of birds. It frequently raids fowl-runs 
for the eggs and young chicks. But it will devour any animal, living or dead, 
that comes in its way. 

Australia possesses numerous Snakes, some venomous, some non-venomous. 
Among the venomous kinds none belong to the Viper family, all being members 
of the Elapine section of the family Colubridce, a group of snakes of wide 
distribution, occurring not only in Australia, but over Africa, Southern 
Asia and the islands of the Malay Archipelago, and Central and South 
America. One of the commonest of these is the Black Snake {Pseudechis 
porphyriacus), which occurs all over Australia, except in the north and in 
Tasmania. The Black Snake, which may reach a length of upwards of 6 feet, 
is commonly found in swampy districts or along the banks of creeks and 
rivers. It is readily recognised by the red under surface. The Copper- 
headed Snake {Denisonia superha) (the popular name of which is derived 
from the colour of the head in the young animal) chiefly frequents swamps 
in Tasmania, Gippsland, and the Alps of Southern New South Wales. The 
Tiger Snake {Notechis scutatus), of about the same size as the Black Snake 
or rather smaller on the average, is also widely distributed on the mainland 
in comparatively dry country, and occurs also in Tasmania. This, the 
deadliest of the Australian venomous snakes, derives its popular name from 
the numerous dark bands crossing the back. The Brown Snake {Diemenia 
textilis), also very venomous, is also of widespread occurrence. It is uni- 
formly brown above in the adult condition, whitish below. The so-called 
Death Adder {Acanthophis antarcticus) is found in sandy localities nearly 
all over Australia, and occurs also in New Guinea. It is a small thick snake, 
rarely as much as 3 feet long, with fine mottling of brown, reddish, and 
yellow on the upper surface, with darker cross bands. The horny spine 
at the end of the tail, which gives its name to the genus and is often supposed 
to be of the nature of a sting, is perhaps used as a fulcrum in locomotion. 

Of the non-venomous snakes the largest by far are the Variegated 
Pythons {Python variegatus), commonly known as Carpet Snake and Diamond 
Snake. Of the two varieties of this species the Carpet Snake is the larger, 
not infrequently reaching a length of 12 feet, while even larger specimens 
are occasionally met with. Its popular name is derived from the irregular 
pattern of dark markings on the pale-brownish ground colour of the upper 
surface. The Diamond variety is darker, almost black, with a yellow spot 
on each scale and diamond-shaped groups of yellow spots at irregular intervals. 
The Carpet Snake occurs over Australia generally, but is absent in the south 



Animal Life op Australia. 227 

of Victoria and in Tasmania. The Diamond Snake occurs only in parts of 
New South Wales and Queensland. The food in both cases consists of the 
smaller mammals and of birds. 

Among the other non-venomous snakes are the Fresh-water Snakes 
{Tropidonotus picturatus) of Eastern Australia, and the Green Tree Snakes, of 
which there are two species — Dendrophis calligaster, of Northern Queens- 
land, and the widely distributed D. punctulatus. The harmless little 
burrowing Blind Snakes of the family TyphlopidcB are numerous. The 
family is of wide distribution in tropical and semi-tropical countries. 

5. Amphibia. 

The Amphibian fauna of Australia is characterized by an abundance of 
Frogs and Toads, and by a somewhat singular absence of the tailed Newts 
and Salamanders, represented abundantly in other regions, and of the snake- 
like CseciUans {Gymnophiona, Apoda), which occur in other warm countries. 
None of the many species of Frogs belong to the genus Rana, to which the 
common English frog belongs, with the exception of a single species found in 
the Cape York Peninsula in the extreme north of Queensland — a district 
which shows many other anomalies in its fauna due to migration from the 
north. The majority of the Australian Frogs are either Tree-frogs {Hylidce), 
or belong to a family, the Cystignathidte, which has no European represen- 
tatives, but contains many South American forms. Thirteen out of the 
sixteen genera that occur in Australia are peculiar to it. The family Engy- 
stomatidcB, well represented in America, Africa, Madagascar, India, the Malay 
Archipelago, and New Guinea, has been recently recorded from the Cape 
York District. Not only are Frogs very abundant in all the habitable parts 
of Australia, but they extend also into Central Australia, a region which for 
long periods is quite rainless. Here Spencer found several species, all similar 
to those occurring in regions of higher rainfall, but showing in their habits 
and mode of life a special adaptation to the dry conditions under which they 
live for the greater part of the year. 

The frog most commonly seen in most parts of Australia is the web-footed, 
brilliantly-coloured, green and golden Bell Frog {Hyla aurea), which, though 
a tree-frog in structure, is rarely found in trees or even bushes, but lives in 
or about swamps, water-holes, and streams. Equally common in many 
parts, though not so frequently seen except at the breeding season owing to 
its nocturnal and burrowing habits, is a cystignathid frog Limnodynastes 
peronii. Another species of Hyla, the large bright-green Hyla caerulca, is 
not uncommon in many parts. The largest Australian frog of all is the 
Barred River Frog {Mixophyes fasciatus), which occurs along rivers and 
creeks in Eastern Australia. 

Perhaps the most interesting of the Amphibia are the small cystignathid 
frogs and toadlets, such as Crinia signijera, Hyperolia marmorata, and 
others, which are to be found lurking under stones in moist places or in holes 
and crannies in soil or rock. The most brilliantly-coloured of these, as of 
all the Australian Amphibia, is the little Notaden hennetti, with its rich 
pattern of bright yellow, red, green, black, and white. 

The spawn of Australian frogs is, in most cases, very similar to that of the 
English frog (Rana temporaria), except that in some forms it is not deposited 



228 Federal Handbook. 



in large masses in water, but is laid in small clumps under stones or tufts 
of herbage in the neighbourhood of water. The stages of the development 
are also closely similar to the corresponding stages in Rana temporaria, except 
that, at least in the common species of Hyla and Limnodynastes , there is a 
great reduction in the system of external gills. 

6. Fresh=Water Fishes. 

The " Burnett Salmon " {Neoceratodus forsteri) is, from an evolutionary 
point of view, the most interesting and important of the fresh-water Fishes 
of Australia. Extremely restricted in its range, it occurs only in the Burnett 
and Mary Rivers of Queensland. But, though found living in no other part 
of the world, Neoceratodus is represented by teeth closely similar to those of 
the living form in Triassic and Jurassic beds of Europe, in the Trias of India, 
in the " Karoo " (Upper Trias) of South Africa, in the " Cretaceous " of 
Patagonia, in the Permian of Texas and in the Upper Jurassic of Colorado. 
The fossil teeth in question were known and had been given the name of 
Ceratodus long before the living fish was discovered. Ceratodus (or Neocera- 
todus) is thus an animal of great geological antiquity, and has had in past 
times a very wide, well-nigh cosmopolitan, geographical range. 

Though not unlike an ordinary typical fish, such as a salmon, in general 
shape, Ceratodus is at once seen to present some marked peculiarities. The 
paired fins are of a peculiar leaf-like shape, and are supported by a limb- 
skeleton which is unlike that of any other living animal, and has been sup- 
posed by some comparative anatomists to be the most primitive known form 
of limb-support. The general surface is covered with large scales, and there 
is an operculum or gill-cover like that of an ordinary bony fish. But, though 
Neoceratodus has gills like those of fishes in general, it also has a lung and 
breathes air ; and its heart and system of blood-vessels are very specially 
modified in comparison with those of other fishes in connexion with this 
double mode of respiration. 

Often popularly confused with the Burnett Salmon (on account perhaps 
of the same native name being sometimes applied to both) is a very different, 
but also interesting, Queensland fish, the " Barramunda " {Scleropages 
leichardti). The chief interest of the Barramunda is connected with the 
peculiar distribution of the family (the Osteoglossidce) to which it belongs. 
Of the four living genera of this family Scleropages extends from the rivers 
of Northern Queensland to Sumatra, Banka, and Borneo : Arapaima (one 
of the largest of fresh-water fishes) inhabits South America (Brazil, the 
Guianas) : Osteoglossum has a similar range : while Heterotis is African, 
inhabiting the Niger, the Nile, the Senegal, and the Gambia. Since, how- 
ever, fossil representatives have been found from the Eocene both of the 
United States and of England, the OsteoglossidcB are not exclusively southern 
forms, but are to be regarded as forming one of the manj' groups which, 
formerly more widespread, have in recent times become more or less com- 
pletely restricted to the great southern land-masses. 

The little fishes commonly called " Minnows," and, when larger, " Native 
Trout " (species of Galaxias), common in nearly all fresh-water streams 
in extra-tropical Australia, also belong to a family (the Galaxiidce) with a 
remarkable distribution. There are only two genera — Galaxias and 



Animal Life of Australia. 229 

Neochanna. Neochanna is a marine fish confined to New Zealand. Of Galaxias, 
some 22 species occur in Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, and tlie Auck- 
land and Chatham Islands : seven species occur in southern South America, 
Tierra del Fuego and the Falklands : one inhabits the streams of Cape 
Colony : one {G. attenuatus) is found not only in the southern extremity 
of South America, with Tierra del Fuego and the Falkland Islands, but also 
in Tasmania, New Zealand, and the Chatham Islands. These facts relating 
to the distribution of the genus Galaxias in general, and in particular the last- 
mentioned fact of the occurrence of the same species on opposite sides of the 
Pacific, have often been adduced as strong evidence in favour of the view that 
a land connexion existed between South America, Australia, and New Zealand 
at a not very remote period. But this view has had to be modified since it 
has been pointed out that, as was stated as long ago as 1872 by Captain 
F. W. Hutton, G. attenuatus goes down to the sea to spawn, and since it has 
been found to occur in large numbers in the sea at the Falkland Islands. 
Moreover, another species, which would seem to be a marine one, has been 
found at the Chatham Islands in the stomach of a Merganser. 

A fresh-water fish very common in the rivers of Tasmania, where it is 
commonly known as the " Cucumber-mullet," and an allied species, the 
" Grayling," occurring sparingly in Victoria, New South Wales, and 
Queensland, belong to another family, the Haplochitonidce, forming a link 
between Australia, New Zealand, and South America. Of the Haplochitoni- 
dcB, which is an exclusively fresh-water family, there are only two genera — 
Haplochiton and Prototroctes. The former contains two species occurring 
in Chili, the southernmost extremity of South America, Tierra del Fuego, and 
the Falkland Islands, and a third in Tasmania. Prototroctes, including the 
Cucumber-mullet and Grayling above mentioned, has three species altogether, 
one in New Zealand, one in Queensland, New South Wales, and Victoria. 

English Brown Trout and American Rainbow Trout have been introduced 
into a number of the rivers, and have done very well ; but the only indigenous 
member of the Trout family (Salmonidce) is a little fish called Smelt {Retro- 
pinna retropinna), which is widely distributed in Australia, and occurs also 
in New Zealand. 

Among other less remarkable Australian fresh-water fishes a number of 
families are represented. Several members of the Herring family live habitu- 
ually in the rivers, or ascend them occasionally. Such is the Fresh-water 
Herring (Potamalosa novcB-hollandice), which occurs plentifully in the 
Hawkesbury, the Clarence, the Richmond, and other rivers of the east coast. 
Several fresh-water members of the Catfish family (Siluridce) also occurs 
and are remarkable, like many allied forms, for the care taken of the eggs. 
The common fresh-water Catfish {Copidoglanis tandanus), which occurs 
throughout the far-spreading Murray River system, and is valued for food, 
belongs to a genus which extends into Asia. Eels {Anguilla reinhardtii) 
are common in all the eastern waters. Of the members of the Perch-like 
family Serranidce, the best known is the so-called Murray Cod {Oligorus 
macquarien-sis), a valuable food-fish which grows to a large size, and is common 
in the Murray River system, as well as in the Clarence and Richmond. 

The only Lamprey occurring in Australian rivers is a species of Geotria — 
a genus that is found also in New Zealand and in ChUi. 



230 Federal Handbook. 



7. Mollusca of the Land and the Fresh Water. 

The terrestrial and fresh-water Mollusca* of Australia are numerous 
and varied. In the dense and moist forests of tropical Queensland the 
greatest development is obtained. Here the typical Australian genus Ther- 
sites presents about 50 species, most being large and showy shells, usually 
banded and globose. In the family Acavidce are included the giants of the 
fauna. Panda falconeri is an ovate shell about 3^ inches long, while the 
coils of the flatter Pedinogyra cunninghami are almost 3 inches in diameter. 
The carnivorous snails are represented by a handsome brown Rhytida, with 
fine thread-like ribs above and smooth beneath. 

Approaching Torres Strait the influence of New Guinea appears in Papuina, 
a genus of arboreal habits. Here, too, the operculate division assume im- 
portance. To this belong Pupina, a glossy shell with transverse slits to the 
aperture, living among drifts of dead leaves, and Helicina, a genus of almost 
world-wide distribution. Among the hills of Central Australia occurs a 
desert fauna of modified Xanthomelon and Tkersites. Like environment has 
moulded these to a superficial resemblance to the snail shells in arid regions 
of Africa or America. 

Slugs are not abundant, but in Tasmania and Victoria is the small hump- 
backed Cystopelta petterdi, on the east codbSt Aneitea graeffei, a large cream- 
coloured slug, with a pink diamond on its back ; and in the Queensland 
tropics, the prismatic Atopos. 

Widespread over all the continent are several genera of Endodontidce, 
small discoidal shells with delicate radiating riblets. 

The fresh- water mollusca are less peculiar than the terrestrial. Familiar 
forms which reappear are Sphoerium, Pisidiuyn, Corbicula, Limncea, Planorbis, 
Ancylus, Bythinia, Vivipara, and Melania. Widespread through every pool 
and creek is the genus Isidora. At first this was mistaken for Physa, buv 
is now found to be really related to Planorbis despite its unlike shell. More 
than 60 species of this very variable genus have been named, but this probably 
exaggerates the number of forms. 

About a score of river mussels are referred to Diplodon, a southern genus 
extending to New Zealand and South America. D. novce-hoUandice, from 
the coastal streams between Brisbane and Newcastle, has a peculiar ornament 
of radiating nodules. 

Tasmania has an interesting series of fluviatile shells. In the lakes 
occur Ancylastrum, the largest known fresh- water limpet. Another limpet, 
Gundlachia, whose shell develops a second chamber, is of sporadic occurrence. 
Some small gasteropods, Petterdiana and Littoriduia, which live in running 
streams, appear to be of southern origin and akin to South American types. 

In Solenaia rugatus and Physopsis jukesi, the Northern Territory possesses 
two exceptionally isolated forms, the fijst of an Asiatic, the second of an 
African genus. 

8. Crustaceans. 

The largest and most conspicuous of the fresh-water Crustacea of Aus- 
tralia are the Crayfishes. There are few streams or stationary bodies of 
fresh water, however small, in extra-tropical regions, that do not contain 

* Por the following brief account of the Mollusca I am indebted to Mr. Chas. Hedley. 



Animal Life of Australia. 231 

Crayfishes ; and they are found to occur even in arid Central Australia 
wherever there is a creek bed that occasionally contains running water. 
By far the most widely-distributed Crayfish in continental Australia is one, 
the Two-keeled Crayfish {Ghemps hicarinatus), which in general appearance 
is not very unlike the common European Crayfish {Astacus or Potamohius 
fiuviatilis or astacus), differing chiefly in the character of the rostrum and the 
chelae. The Australian form, however, reaches larger dimensions, though 
in this respect there is a wide difference between specimens from different 
localities. Cheraps hicarinatus is more especially an inhabitant of dams and 
waterholes or of pools in the more sluggish streams, and excavates innumerable 
burrows in the banks, often doing serious damage in this way to mud or clay 
embankments of storage dams and reservoirs. 

In clear-running streams the prevailing Crayfish is the common Serrated 
or Spiny Crayfish {Astacopsis serratus) , with numerous varieties, some of which 
may prove to be of specific rank. In the larger rivers, such as the Murrum- 
bidgee and the Murray, these Crayfishes reach a large size, assuming dimen- 
sions as great as those of the largest of the European Sea-lobsters ; and even 
in very small creeks specimens of great size are occasionally met with. The 
Spiny Crayfish, like the two-keeled form, is an active burrower, and is able 
by taking refuge in deep burrows with a little water at the bottom to survive 
periods of prolonged drought. 

In Tasmania the Crayfishes are represented by two species, which are 
nearly allied to Astacopsis serratus of the mainland. One of these {A.franJc- 
linii), which occurs in the northern rivers of the island State, is the largest 
Crayfish known, even exceeding in size the largest of the Spiny Crayfishes 
of continental Australia. 

Quite peculiar to Australia is a group of Crayfishes belonging to the 
genus EngcBus, which do not ordinarily live in streams or pools, but inhabit 
during the day-time the interior of burrows excavated sometimes along the 
banks of streams, sometimes merely in swampy ground which may be at 
some distance from any running stream. These small Crustaceans, with 
their feeble powers of locomotion and their reduced abdomen, seem to have 
taken a short step in the direction of the modification undergone by the 
Hermit-crabs. 

In Western Australia three species of Crayfishes are known — Chceraps 
quinque-carinatus, C. tenuimanus, and C. preissii, all very distinct from those 
of Eastern Australia. 

The Australian Crayfishes all belong to a family, the Parastacidce, which 
is exclusively southern in its distribution, taking the place in the south 
occupied by the family AstacidcB (or Pota)nobiidce) in the north. Their 
nearest allies are thus not the English Crayfishes, but other members of the 
ParastacidcB — the Crayfishes of South America (Parastacus), New Zealand 
(Paranephrops), and Madagascar {Astacoides). 

Extremely common in creeks, at least in Eastern Australia, are minute 
transparent shrimp-like Crustaceans, which, so far as they have been 
examined, have been found to belong to a species, Xiphocaris compressa, 
originally described from Japan, and since found in Norfolk Island. 

If we leave Engceus, the Land-crabs, and Phreatoicopsis out of account, 
the only terrestrial Crustaceans are the Wood-lice and Pill-bugs (Isopoda), 



232 Federal Handbook. 



and the Hoppers (Amphipoda) . The latter {Talitrus sylvaticus) occur from 
near the sea-level to a high elevation on the Southern Alps. 

Land-crabs, in the strict sense of the term, are confined in Australia to 
the far north and the islands of Torres Straits. But River-crabs of the genus 
Geothelphusa occur far up the Darling River and its tributaries, and were 
found by the Horn Expedition in waterholes along the creeks in Central 
Australia. When the creeks and rivers dry up, the River-crabs, like the 
Crayfishes, burrow into the banks, and by burying themselves in moist clay 
may escape desiccation. 

A little fresh-water Lake-crab {Hymenosoma lacustris) occurs in Lake 
Colac, in Victoria. The same species is found in the North Island of New 
Zealand, and also in Norfolk Lsland. 

An order of the higher Crustacea — the Anaspidacea — fossil (marine) 
representatives of which are known from Permian and Carboniferous strata 
in Europe and North America, is confined at the present day to Tasmania 
{Anaspides and Paranaspides) and Victoria {Koonunga). The Anaspids are 
little Crustaceans of a Shrimp-like appearance, which inhabit fresh-water, 
the Tasmanian forms occurring only at high elevations (2,000 feet and 
upwards). Though in many respects resembling the Shrimps and Cra}^shes, 
the Anaspidacea differ from them in the complete absence of the cephalo- 
thoracic sliield or carapace, and in the series of plate-like gills attached to 
the legs. 

A family of fresh-water Isopoda — the Phreatoicidce — was, until recently, 
regarded as peculiar to Australia, including Tasmania, and New Zealand. 
Very recently a species of the type-genus, Phreatiocus, has been found in South 
Africa. Most of the Australian and Tasmanian forms occur at high eleva- 
tions. One genus, Pkreatoicopsis, is terrestrial and not aquatic. 

Of fresh-water Amphipods there are several species of Gammarus occurring 
both in Victoria and New South Wales ; two species of Chiltonia have been 
described from Lake Hindmarsh, Victoria, and species of Hyalella and 
Neoniphargus also occur. 

While the higher Crustacea (Malacostraca) of Australian fresh-waters 
contain such a number of interesting characteristic forms — the Crayfishes and 
Antispidacea in particular — the lower Crustacea (sub-class Entomostraca of 
the older classification) are not, so far as known, in any way specially remark- 
able. The giants of the group, the Phyllopods, Apus, Lepidurus, and 
Triops, occur, under favorable conditions, in enormous numbers in the 
inland districts. The Brine-shrimp {Artemia) has been found both in New 
South Wales (neighbourhood of Sydney) and in A^ictoria, and a peculiar 
Australian genus, BranchineUa, of the same family, is represented by three 
species occurring in fresh or brackish water in most parts of Australia. The 
Bivalved Phyllopoda {Limnadidce) occur very abundantly in Australia, 
and are represented by several genera, including Eulimnadia, Lifnnadopsis, 
Paralimnadia, and Cyzicus (Estheria). 

The much smaller Cladocera or " Water Fleas " are represented by species 
of the cosmopolitan genus Daphnia, also by species of Moina, Macrothrix, 
Lynceus, and others. 

The Australian fresh-water Copepoda and Ostracoda have not received 
so much attention as the Phyllopoda. But, of the former order, species 



Animal Life op Australia. 233 

of the genera Cyclops and Diaptomus have been described, and of the 
latter a number of species of Cypris, and also species of Candona and 
Notodromus. 

9. Insects. 

The Insecta of Australia are too vast an assemblage to be dealt with in 
a brief summary ; but the following are a few leading points : — 

Among the Orthoptera the Cockroaches {BlattidcB) are represented by 
both native and introduced forms. Of those which occur habitually in houses, 
the indigenous Periplaneta australasicB has become largely replaced by the 
American Periplaneta americana. There are a number of " wild " species, 
wingless for the most part, and usually of large size, to be found most 
frequently lurking in crevices in rotten timber and under fallen logs and 
stones. Most of these when molested discharge a foul-smelling secretion 
from glands at the end of the abdomen. One of the commonest is Poly- 
zosteria limbata, a wingless dark-brown Cockroach with yellow lines round 
the terga. 

The Mantidce, or " Praying Insects," with their innocent appearance 
and predaceous habits, form an important element of the Australian 
insect fauna. The most conspicuous of these are species of the genera 
Archimantis, Orthodera, and Tenodera, some over 4 inches in length. 

The PhasmidcB or Leaf- and Stick- Insects are probably more numerous 
in Australia than in any other region of the earth's surface. The protective 
mimetic features, which in many cases cause these curiously modified insects 
to resemble their usual surroundings so closely as to render difficult detection 
by insect-eating birds or lizards, consist mainly in the form of the body 
itself being in many cases narrow and elongated so as to resemble the appear- 
ance of a twig of the plant on which they feed, and in the presence of 
foliaceous green appendages on the limbs and body, bearing a close 
resemblance to the leaves. Some of the Australian Phasmidce are the largest 
of existing insects, with a length of as much as 12 inches. 

Of the Grasshoppers and Locusts there are many genera and species, 
some winged, some wingless, some with long feelers, some with short. The 
term " Locust " is applied to any member of the Grasshopper family that has 
the peculiarity of occasionally increasing enormously in numbers, so as to 
give rise to great swarms which move about the country destroying the 
vegetation as they go. Several of the Australian species swarm in this way 
and assume for the time the character of " Plague Locusts." One of these 
is the Lesser Plain Locust (Chortoicetes pusilla), a comparatively small insect 
about an inch in length. Another is the Larger Plain Locust (C terminifera). 
A third is the Yellow-winged Grasshopper {Locusta danica), very common 
everjTvhere, which sometimes causes devastation in Queensland. 

The most remarkable-looking member of the family is the so-called 
Mountain Grasshopper {Acridopeza reticulata), which is very unlike a normal 
Grasshopper in appearance, with its short, rounded, blue, white, and red 
body, and its peculiar oval concavo-convex elytra. 

Of the Crickets (Gryllidce) there are a number of species of Field Crickets 
— sometimes occurring in swarms — and a Mole Cricket {Gryllotaljia coarctata), 
found practically all over Australia. 



234 Federal Handbook. 



Among the Neuroptera special mention may be made of the Ant-lions 
{Myrmeleonidoe) and the Dragon-flies {Odonata). The Ant-lions are numerous, 
most of the described species being referred to the genus Glenurus. G. pul-. 
chellus is the commonest species along the coast. The largest is G. fundatus, 
which is found along the coast of Queensland. 

The Australian Odonata* are as remarkable in their way as most of the 
animal groups of the same continent. There is a rich autochthonous fauna, 
chiefly located in the south-western corner, along the eastern coast and ranges, 
and in Tasmania. A tropical invasion, mainly of LihellulincB, descends 
along the Queensland coast into New South Wales. The remarkable sub- 
family Corduliince is represented in Australia by about forty species, roughly 
one-fifth of the world's total ! Of these, Hemicordulia tau and H. australice, 
are common nearly everywhere, and the former may possibly be taken in 
August. The peculiar species of Synthenies must be sought for later in the 
season, mostly at high elevations. On the Blue Mountains two very archaic 
species are to be obtained, viz., Petalura gigantea and Austropetalia patricia. 
The larva of the former tunnels in mud. The latter is very closely allied to 
a group of Chilian species, and has no other close relatives at all. In 
August a few common Dragon-flies begin to appear, and the following may 
be met with : — At Perth, Austrolestes annulosus, A. analis, Xanthagrion 
erythroneurum, Anax papuensis, and Mschna brevistyla ; the same species at 
Adelaide ; at Melbourne, the same except A. annulosus, which is replaced by 
A.cingulatus and A. leda ; at Sydney, the same together with Argiolestes ictero- 
melas, Austroagrion cyane, Ischnura heterosticta, Ischnura aurora, Austrolestes 
psyche, Orthetrum caledonicum, Diplacodes hipunctata, and D. kcematodes. 
Full-fed larvse of most of these species can be easily obtained during August. 

Termites, or White Ants, as they are popularly called, abound in all parts 
of Australia, and some of them, such as the little Termes (Coptotermes) lacteus, 
do much damage to wooden structures. Many of the species build mounds 
or termitaria of comminuted wood with, in some cases, an investment of clay, 
constructed usually over an original tree-stump. These, in the case of some 
of the tropical species, are of great size — as much as 18 feet in height in the 
case of Eutermes pyrijormis of tropical Queensland. 

Of the Hymenoptera, one of the families specially developed in Australia 
is that of the Saw-flies {TenthredinidoB), of which there are a large number, 
all belonging to genera — Perga, Pterygophorus, and others — peculiar to Aus- 
tralia. The blackish larvae of Perga are frequently to be seen clinging in 
great masses to branches of Eucalypti, on the leaves of which they feed. 

Another largely-represented family is that of the Chalcididce, or Parasitic 
Wasps, minute forms, most of which deposit their eggs in the eggs, larvae or 
pupae of other insects, or in the galls produced by Coccids. 

Of similar habits are the still smaller Proctotrypidce, some of which appear 
to be of economic value owing to the fact that they are destructive to various 
scale and other insects injurious to fruit-trees. 

Also destructive, and on a larger scale, to other forms of insect life, such 
as caterpillars of moths and butterflies, in which they deposit their eggs, are 
the Ichneumons (IchneumonidcB), of which there are many in Australia, 
though comparatively few have been described. 

* For the information on the Odonata I am indebted to Mr. R. J. Tillyard. ' 



Animal Life of Australia. 235 

The Flower Wasps {Thynnidce), whicli are only represented outside Aus- 
tralia on the west coast of South America, and, by a few species, in Asia and 
the Pacific Islands, are very numerous on such flowering shrubs as the Ti- 
trees {Melaleuca, Leptospermum). About three-fourths of the described 
species of Thynnidce are Australian. 

The well-known Mason Wasps {Eumenidce), which are solitary forms 
with the habit of constructing nests of clay, often on a verandah, or even 
in the interior of a house, and storing them with caterpillars, are common 
in all parts of Australia. 

The true (social) Wasps (Vespidce), which construct nests of a parchment- 
like material, are represented in Australia by two genera, Ocaria and Polistes, 
the genus Vespa, though of wide distribution and occurring as near as Java, 
being absent. 

Of the true Bees (Apidce) there are a large number, but the genera Apis 
and Bomhus do not occur. The Carpenter Bees of the genus Lestis, some 
of which make their nests in the interior of dead flower-stems of grass trees 
(Xanthorrhoea), are peculiar to Australia. The stingless native Honey- 
bees of the genus Trigona, which are widely distributed over Australia, con- 
struct irregular wax combs in cavities in Eucalypts and other trees, and store 
them with a dark-coloured honey. The Leaf-cutting Bees, which construct 
the cells of their nests out of pieces cut from the leaves of plants, are repre- 
sented by a number of species of Megachile — a genus found in most parts 
of the world. 

The Ant Family (Formicidce) is represented by an immense number of 
genera and species. Of these the most characteristic are the large Ants of 
the genus Myrmecia, commonly known as Bull-dog Ants, which are sometimes 
as much as an inch or more in length and have a very poisonous sting ; these 
are confined to Australia. Honey-pot Ants in which, as in a North American 
and an African species, certain of the workers of the community serve as 
store-houses for honey, occur in Central Australia. 

The House-flies which swarm about dwellings in the cities of Australia 
in summer are identical with the common House-fly of England (Musca 
domestica), a species almost universal in its distribution. A somewhat 
smaller fly {Musca vetustissiyna) is the pest fly of the bush. A fly {Stomoxis 
calcitrans) very like the House-fly, common out of doors and sometimes 
coming into houses, inflicts a sharp bite when it settles on the skin, and is 
extremely troublesome to horses and cattle. This, like the House-fly, is of 
almost world-wide distribution. Of the Blow-flies, the commonest species 
are Anastellorhina augur, with a brown abdomen having a blue stripe down 
the centre, and Calliphora villosa, which has the abdomen covered with 
yellowish or brownish hairs, and a somewhat smaller species of the same 
genus, C. oceanicB, with a steely-blue abdomen, is also very common. Several 
of the species of Blow-flies have become very formidable pests, which have 
assumed the character of a yearly-increasing menace to the pastoral industry, 
their maggots, bred in the wool of the sheep, producing sores which often 
eventually cause death. 

Australia is particularly rich in Gall-gnats {Cecidornyidce), the larvre of 
most of which burrow in leaves and other parts of plants, producing frequently 
definite galls or other malformations. 



236 Federal Handbook. 



Over 50 species of Mosquitoes have been recorded from Australia, most of 
them species of Culex. Several of them are of cosmopolitan range, or have 
been introduced from other countries. The Mosquitoes commonest in houses 
are Culex albo-annulatus, C. fatigans, and C. marinus, the last able to breed 
in salt water. The genus Anopheles, to which belong the Mosquitoes that 
transmit malarial fever, is represented by several species ; and at least 
one species occurs of the genus Stegornya — the yellow-fever transmitting 
genus. 

Though not so rich in Butterflies as South America, Australia yet holds 
a high place in that respect among the zoological regions. Thus, while only 
68 species occur in Great Britain, a recent catalogue of the Australian species 
gave a total of 330. The largest and most brilliantly-coloured forms are 
tropical. Fritillaries, Emperors, Admirals, Blues, Whites, Yellows, Skippers, 
and Swallow-tails are all well represented. Belenois Java, one of the whites, 
in some seasons comes down from the interior to the coast in such enormous 
swarms as to constitute a veritable plague. 

Of the many families of Moths perhaps two of the most characteristic 
are the Case-moths and the Cup-moths, the former on account of the peculiar 
sheath of tough silky material which the larva weaves about itself, with 
fragments of leaves or sticks woven in, and the latter because of the vase- 
shaped cocoons of a parchment-like substance in which the eggs are enclosed. 
Included among the other families are Butterfly Moths [Uraniidoi), Day 
Moths (Agaristidce), Ringed Moths {Syntomidce), Burnet Moths (ZygcenidcB), 
Hawk Moths {Sphingidce), Wood Moths [Hepialidce), Tiger Moths (Arctiidce), 
Brown Tails {Liparidce), Silkworm Moths [Bomhycidce), Loopers (GeometridcB), 
Cutworm Moths (Noctuidce), Leaf Rollers {Pyralidce), and Bell Moths 
{ToTtricidce). 

The Cutworm Moths are of economic importance, owing to the damage 
frequently done by their larvae (" Plague Caterpillars," " Army Worms ") 
to crops of all kinds. The Bugong Moth {Agrotis infusa) occasionally appears 
in enormous swarms in the coastal districts. 

Of the Coleoptera, or Beetles, some 10,000 Australian species have been 
described, and, as there are a number of families which have not been fully 
investigated, there can be no doubt that this seemingly immense multitude 
falls far short of the total. One of the best developed and most characteristic 
of the families is that of the Buprestidce, or Jewel Beetles, of which only ten 
species occur in Great Britain. These large and often brilliantly-coloured 
metallic Beetles are most abundant on flowering shrubs in the coastal districts 
of extra-tropical Australia. Stigmodera is the most characteristic genus. 
It is peculiar to Australia, and some 240 species have been described. 
The Stigmoderce are large Beetles, some as much as 2| inches in length, 
of rich and varied metallic colouration. 

Of the Hemiptera perhaps the most characteristically developed, and 
certainly the most conspicuous, family is that of the Cicadas (Cicadidce), the 
chorus of whose shrill cries rings out during summer from ever}^ shrub and 
tree. Of the many Australian species of Cicadas some — more particularly 
those inhabiting the coastal districts — are large and handsome insects. 
Thopha saccata has a reddish-brown body about 2 inches long with a stretch 
of wings of 5 inches ; it is common in all the southern coastal districts and 



Animal Life of Australia. 237 

along the east coast as far north as Brisbane. The bright green Cyclochila 
australasice is even commoner in New South Wales ; and a third common 
form is the Black Cicada, Psaltoda moerens, belonging to a genus peculiar to 
Australia. Another large Cicada very common in Eastern Australia is 
Ahricta cxirvicosta, a reddish-brown form, with a silvery down over the 
surface. 

Another characteristic family of Hemiptera is the Psyllidce, or " Lerp " 
insects, the larvae of many of which secrete a shell-like protective covering 
of lerp scales, or of soft woolly matter, while others produce galls on 
leaves. 

Of the Australian Coccids the most remarkable group is the Bmcliyscelince, 
or Gall-making Coccids, the larvae of which form galls on the twigs and leaves 
of many native plants. These are practically confined to Australia, the only 
instance of a Gall-making Coccid occurring elsewhere being a single species 
found in Mexico. 

10. Scorpions and Spiders. 

Of the Arachnida the Scorpionida, or Scorpions, are not uncommon in 
Australia ; but none of them are large, and the number of species is small, 
and all of them belong to three of the six recognised families — the ButhidcB, 
the Scorpionidce, and the BothriuridcB. Of the last-named family, Cerco- 
phonius is a genus confined to Australia. 

The Spiders* of Australia are very numerous, and belong to a great 
number of families. Reference can be made here to only a few of the most 
interesting forms. One of the best-represented groups is that of the Trap- 
door Spiders, of the family Avicularidce, of which upwards of sixty Australian 
species have already been described. Of the family Hypochilidce, which 
comprises only three species, one species [Ectatosticta troglodytes) occurs in 
caves in Tasmania, a second in North America, and a third in China. Of the 
ArgiopidcB, one of the most interesting and beautiful is Argiope cetherea 
{A. regalis), which occurs not only all over Australia, but in New Guinea 
and many of the islands of Torres Straits. This brightly-coloured Spider 
is popularly known as the " St. Andrew's cross Spider " on account of the 
cross-shaped stabilimentum which it weaves into the middle of its orbicular 
web. 

Also included in the Argiopidce are two widely distributed species, Poeci- 
lopachys bispinosa and Celcenia excavata, both of which closely resemble 
the droppings of birds. Another striking member of the same group is 
Dicrostichus magnijicus, which is a large and brilliantly-coloured Spider 
with a peculiar branched crest or protuberance on which the eyes are 
situated. 

The family ThomisidcB, or " Crab Spiders," comprises a number of in- 
teresting species, one of which — Saccodomus formivorus — lives in trees and 
preys on tree-haunting ants. The Salticidce, or " Jumping Spiders," are 
very numerous, and comprise some remarkable forms, among which may be 
mentioned the brilliantly coloured Saitis volans and S. splendidus, both of 
which have an extended lateral flattened abdominal integument which is 
folded round the spider when at rest and tliiown open when it leaps. 

* For information on the Spiders I am indebted to Mr. W. J. Rainbow. 



238 Federal Handbook. 



11. Centipedes and Millepedes. 

The Australian Myriopoda are extremely numerous, and all, or nearly 
all, of the known families are represented, though some of the smaller and 
more obscure groups have not been fully investigated. Of the Diploj)oda 
the largest and most conspicuous are the Millepedes of the family lulidce — 
cylindrical, vegetable-feeding Myriopods with numerous segments, each seg- 
ment bearing two pairs of legs. These are very common about rotten timber, 
under fallen logs, and under stones, the elongated body coiled up into a spiral 
when at rest. 

The family Cambalidce, which in regions outside Australia are chiefly 
distributed in Polynesia, in India, and Madagascar, is represented in Western 
Australia by four peculiar genera — Dinocambala, Podykipus, Atelomastix, 
and Samichus. 

The PolydesmidoB, also with a cylindrical body, but with comparatively 
few segments, each with a lobe or keel on its upper surface, is represented 
by several peculiar genera {Antichiropus and others), and a number of species. 

The Polyzoniidoe, small worm-like forms with reduced appendages and 
sucking mouth, has several representatives of the genera Orsilochus and 
Siphonotus. 

Of the Chilopoda the Centipedes of the family Scolopendridce comprise 
the largest of the Myriopods, with flattened bodies and 21 or 23 pairs of 
legs. Of these, a considerable number of species have been described from 
all parts of Australia. Among the commoner and more widely-distributed 
forms are the very variable ScoJopendra morsicans, which is common all over 
Australia, and is almost cosmopolitan in its range, S. (Rhombocephalus) Iceta, 
and Ethmostigmus rubripes, the largest of the Australian Centipedes, which 
occurs also in the South Sea Islands. 

The Lithobiidce, which are comparatively short, with only fifteen segments, 
are represented by several genera ; and the greatly elongated many-seg- 
mented Notophilidce are also represented, though perhaps only by introduced 
forms. 

The long-limbed, short-bodied Scutigeridce, which differ from the rest of 
the Myriopoda in the possession of compound eyes and the presence of air- 
sacs, are represented by at least one species, AlJotkereua maculata, which 
not infrequently comes into town houses. 

The order Symphyla is represented by at least one species of Scutigerella, 
a small insect-like Myriopod with twelve segments, with a pair of parapodia 
on each in addition to the legs, and with only one pair of breathing pores, 
which are situated on the head. 

Of the aberrant order Pauropoda there is no record. 

The Onychophora are well represented in Australia by about five species 
distributed over all the States, with the apparent exception of South Aus- 
tralia and the Northern Territory ; but they do not seem to be in abundance 
anywhere. The five described species are referred to the two genera, Ooperi- 
patus and Peripatoides. 

12. Earthworms, Leeches, etc. 

Of the Earthwonns the family CryptodrilidcB is so specially well repre- 
sented in Australia that it might be said to have its head-quarters there. 



Animal Life of Australia. 239 

five genera of the family out of a total of about sixteen being peculiar to 
Australia, or only slightly represented elsewhere. Some of the Crypto- 
drilids, such as Megascolides, are of gigantic size — up to 5 feet in length. 

The fresh-water allies of the Earthworms are very numerous, and almost 
all the families are represented, though only a few have been studied. Enchy- 
trceids are common both in water and damp earth. Chcetonotus, Dero, Nais, 
Aeolosoma, and Tuhifex also occur — the last-named present sometimes in 
enormous numbers in muddy creeks. The Phreodrilidce is the most charac- 
teristic Australian family. It is represented elsewhere in South America. 
in Kerguelen, and in New Zealand and South Africa. In Australia there 
are at least two peculiar genera, Phreodriloides, found in the Blue Lake on 
Mount Kosciusko, and Astacopsidrilus, two species of which constantly 
live on the surface of fresh-water Crayfishes. 

Australia possesses two peculiar genera of Land Leeches — Philcemon, 
confined to Australia and Tasmania, and Geobdella, to Australia and New 
Guinea. Of fresh-water Leeches the commonest and the largest is Limnob- 
della australis, the common Australian Medicinal Leech. Other fresh-water 
Leeches are species of the widely distributed genera Glossiphonia (or Clepsine) 
and Herpobdella (or Nephelis), and one each of the genera Dineta and Semi- 
lageneta, which are peculiar to Australia. 

Of fresh-water Polyzoa the commonest — abundant in Queensland, 
New South Wales, and South Australia — is the familiar European species 
Plumatella repens. Plumatella princeps, which has also been found in these 
three States, is a cosmopolitan form. Another species of the same genus — 
P. aplinii — which occurs in New South Wales and Victoria, appears to be 
peculiar to Australia ; and the same holds good of a species of Lophopus — 
L. lendenfeldi — which has only been found at Parramatta, and of Fredericella 
australiensis, which occurs abundantly at the Pott's Hill Reservoir, of the 
Sydney Water Supply. A species of Alctjonella and one of Fredericella 
have also been found in the neighbourhood of Sydney. 

Land Planarians are particularly abundant in Australia, though, since 
the genera represented are all pretty widely distributed in the other zoological 
regions, they do not present any peculiarly Australian features. The com- 
monest of them about the towns is an introduced species, Placocephalus 
kewensis, which also occurs in England, in Germany, and Cape Colony, 
as well as in Samoa. Of the others, about 50 species have been described, 
including 35 of Geoplana, 4 of Rhynchodemus, 5 of Artioposthia, and 4 
of Platydemus. Very little is known of the allied Fresh-water Triclads, 
though they are abundant enough — the only described forms being a few 
Western Australian species of Planaria. And the same has to be said of the 
fresh-water Rhahdocceles, though superficial descriptions have been published 
of a few of them, and a still more limited number have been more thoroughly 
studied. 

Mention may here be made of an order of Planarian-like Flat-worms, the 
Temnocephaloidea (usually placed with the Trematodes), since they are 
specially numerous and varied in Australia. These live on the outer surfaces 
and sometimes in the branchial cavities of Crayfishes and other fresh- water 
Crustaceans. Though Temnocephoids occur in other regions (New Zealand, 
the Malay Archipelago, South America, India, Madagascar), they apparently 



240 Federal Handbook. 



reach their maximum development in Australia as regards numbers and 
variety. 

Only one species of Land Nemertine {Geonemertes australis) has so far 
been found in Australia ; it occurs in Victoria, New South Wales, and 
Tasmania. 

No fresh-water Medusae are known to occur. There seems to be only 
one species of fresh-water Polype described {Hydra hexactinella or H.oligactis), 
and only one fresh-water Zoophyte of the colonial type {Cordylophora white- 
leggei). About ten species of fresh -water Sponges, belonging to seveial 
genera, have been described. They have been found in all parts, with the 
exception of the Northern Territory and the northern parts of Queensland 
and of Western AustraUa. 



CORRIGENDA. 



Page 256, line 52, for " Aechm " read " Aeschna " 

,, 257, ,, 21, for " Tremanotus " read " Trematonotus " 

„ 257, ,, 41, for " FenestallidcB " read " Fenestellidce " 

„ 258, ,, 10, for " RJmchopteris " read " Rhacopteris " 

„ 262, „ 29, for " trilolites " read " trilobites " 

„ 266, ,, 32, for " Rhachopteris " read " Rhacopteris " 

,, 266, „ 43, for " Streptorhymuhs " read " Streptorhynchus " 

,, 270, ,, 45, for " Glossoptris " read " Glossopteris " 

,, 275, ,, 41, for " Macrotcenipteris " read " Macrotceniopteris " 

,, 275, ,, 43, for " Cladophebis " read " Cladophlebis " 

,, 276, „ 26, for " Tremanotus " read " Trematonotus " 

,, 277, ,, 9, for " Beyrichia endothyra " read " Beyrichia. Eiulothyra ' 

„ 277, „ 32, for " Tremanotus " read " Trenuitonotus " 

„ 277, „ 42, for " Cladophebis " read " Cladophlebis " 

,, 282, ,, 10, for '' gregarious " read '" gregarius " 

,. 282, ,, 11, for " Archoeomene " read " Archceomoene " 

„ 282, „ 27, for " Killak " read " Kirrak " 

,, 282, „ 37, for " Macrotoeinopteris " read " Macrotoeniopteris " 

,, 286, ,, 47, for " Pentrune " read " Penteune " 

.. 287, ,, 41, for " Meiolonia " read " Meiolania " 

,. 291, ,, 31 and 35, for " Oleiwllus " read " Olenellus " 

,, 291, „ 34, for " Huenolla " read " Huenella " 

„ 294, ,, 34, for " Spiriferina dielasnia" read '' Spiriferina, Dielasnui " 

,, 294, „ 36, for " senilia " read " senilis " 

„ 294, ,, 40, for " CyHitui syringothyris " read " Cyrtina, Stjringothyris " 

„ 295, „ 12, for " Ptycomphaliiia " read " Ptijchomphalina " 

,, 295, ,, 39, for " spirifeidae " read " spiriferidse " 

,, 296, ,, 9, for " Plagiophyllum " read " Pagiophyllum " 

,, 296, ,, 39, for " Cladophebis " read " Cladophlebis " 

,, 297, ,, 3, for " Cladophebis " read " Cladophlebis " 

,, 297, ,, 21, for " Alithopteris " read " Alethopteris " 

„ 298, „ 4, for the table as given, read : — 



McCoy and Chapman. 


Hall and Pritchard. 


Tate and Deanant. 


5. 


Pleistocene 








4. 

3. 


Upper Pliocene 

(Chapman) 
Lower Pleistocene . . 


4. 
3. 


Werrikooien (Pleio- 

cene) 
Kalimnan (Miocene) 

Janjukian (Eocene).. 


Pleistocene (Tate) 
Pliocene (Dennant) 
Miocenp 

r? Oligocene (Tate) 
-1 Eocene (Tate and Den- 


2. 
1. 


Miocene . . 
Oligocene . . 


1. 

2 


Aldingan (Eocene in 

part) 
Balcombian (Eocene) 


l nant) 
Eocene in part 

Eocene 



Page 298, line 30, for " Carcharodon, Megalodon" read " Carcharodon megalo- 
don" 
,, 301, ,, 24, for " antiauslralia " read " antiaustralis " 
„ 306, last sentence should come after first sentence on page 30.") 
,, 307, line 26, for " osmiridian " read " osmiridium " 
., 309, ,, 43, for " molanite-hauy-syenite " read " melanite-hauyn- 
syenite." 
C. 121 54. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 241 

CHAPTER VII. 

THE GEOLOGY OF THE COMMONWEALTH. 

By T. W. Edgeworth David, O.M.G., D.Sc, F.R.S., Professor of Geology 
in the University of Sydney. 

SYNOPSIS. 

1. Introduction. 8. The Australian Cainozoic System, 

2. Coastal Physiography. by F. Chapman, A.L.S. 

3. PALiEOGEOGRAPHY AND PRESENT Re- 9. Igneous Rocks, by T. W. E. David, 

LIEF. and E. W. Skeats, D.Sc, A.R.C.S. 

4. Stratigraphical Features. 10. Metamorphic Rocks, by T. W. E. 

5. Pre-Historic Man. David, and E. W. Skeats, D.Sc, 

6. Australian Gr.\ptolites, by T. S. A.R.C.S. 

HaU, M.A., D.Sc. 11. Papua. 

7. Notes on the Paleontology of 

Australia, by W. S. Dun. 

1. Introduction, 

An observer taking a bird's-eye view of Australia and Tasmania would 
see the great island continent carpeted nearest the coast with strips of 
dark-green gum forest on the east, south-east, and north, and again in the 
south-west of "Western Australia, with an outlying strip upon the Flinders 
Range, of South Australia. The remainder would present a curious patch- 
work, partly of the dull green sage bush, salt bush, and other salsolacious 
herbs of the steppes, the grasses of the savannahs, and the dark-green mulga 
scrubs, partly of patches of red and brown sands of desert areas dotted with 
oases which fringe the worn-down stumps of ancient inland mountains. 

White specks in numbers would be conspicuous in this patchwork of 
green and red and brown wherever the saline surfaces of dead lakes, or 
" playas," reflect the sunlight, or where the highlands of New South Wales 
and Victoria are white with snow, except in late summer. To the south-east 
the emerald isle of Tasmania, the south coast of South Australia, the south- 
east coast of Victoria, and in places, the inland uplands of tropical Queensland 
would appear jewelled with live lakes. To the north the great island of 
New Guinea would loom large with its alpine ranges whitened with snow ; 
its mountain uplands, where visible through breaks in the mist, showing 
verdant grassy slopes encircled by sombre pines and cypress. Lower still 
would be seen the dense dark-gi'een jungle of the coastal plains. 

Australia is well known as the home of the eucalypt, and this most charac- 
teristic tree is in itself an epitome of the climatic conditions of Australia in 
late geological time. 

The most primitive types of our eucalypts develop their leaves with the 
broad surfaces horizontal, pointing to a time when there was no need to take 
special precautions to conserve moisture. On the othei- liand, in the vast 
majority of eucalypts, the leaves hang with their broad surface vertical, so 
as to offer as little evaporating surface as possible to the sun's rays. These 
eucalypts in their early stages of growth show the atavistic tendency to 
develop their leaves with the broad surfaces horizontal. 

C. 1-21.54. Q 



242 Federal Handbook. 



This adaptation of plant to climate in such a way as to enable the plant 
to resist drought connotes a former better rainfall, and this in turn suggests 
a former higher relief for the Australian land surface inducing a more abun- 
dant convectional rain, and thus the eucalypts record the most recent climatic 
changes of Australia, and prepare us for those evidences of peneplained and 
downward warped mountain chains with recently uplifted coast lines, which 
harmonize with its large disintegrated drainage system. This disintegration 
of the drainage is again in harmony with the shallow wide-bottomed valleys 
choked with the rock debris, with the vast red soil plains, and with the kunkars, 
laterites, " pindan, ironstones," and porcellanites, so characteristic of the 
interior of Australia, as of all countries where the rainfall is scant and the 
evaporation great. But that these inland areas of low rainfall are not without 
those blessings of aridity, the rich, plant foods which have accumulated during 
the sabbatical periods of drought, is proved by the extension inland, through 
methods of dry farming, of the wheat belt, and the consequent contraction 
of the central waste areas. 

Australia, including Tasmania, has an area of 2,974,600 square miles ; 
it is just a trifle larger than the United States of America, and twenty-five 
times as large as the United Kingdom. As it extends over 33° of latitude, 
its climate varies from tropical to cool temperate. 

2. Coastal Physiography. 

A glance at the map (PI. III.) explains some of the chief reasons for the 
shape of the Australian coast. 

The chief coastal indent — the Gulf of Carpentaria — is to be correlated 
with strong tectonic lines, approximating to a meridional direction which 
determined the position of the northern end of the Cretaceous Basin. The 
dominant folds in Arnhem Land, on the west side of the Gulf, are parallel 
to its shore line, the folds in the Palaeozoic rocks of the Cape York Peninsula 
are approximately meridional, with a very heavy downthrow at the trough 
of the Little River coal-field. The southern shore of the Gulf seems related 
to the W.N.W., E.S.E. fold axes which run through the Etheridge and Gilbert 
gold-fields. 

The Great Australian Bight again appears to be of tectonic origin, lying 
between the old fold mountains (recently block-faulted) of the Mount Lofty 
and Flinders Eanges, near Adelaide, and the vast peneplain of Western Aus- 
tralia, with its worn-down folds, shaped in plan like an inverted S. (See 
PL IIL). 

The two deep indents — Spencer Gulf and St. Vincent Gulf — are clearly 
" Senkungsf elder," the southern end of the Great Rift Valley which ex- 
tends by way of Lake Torrens (92 feet above sea level) to Lake Eyre (about 
60 feet below sea level). (See Fig. 1.) 

^'G 1- Sketch Section, (suggested by works of Walter Howchin) 

Across the Rift Valley of South Australia ^^^^^ 

Vertical Scale 10,000 feer to an inch „/^^j^ 

« ,• ■ Yorke Fteninsula S'vincent 
PorlLincoln SPENCERS GULF TorKe reninsuM 

^^ TEIRTIARY, PEIRMO-CARBONIFEROUS 
^^ AND CAMBRIAN ROCKS IN TROUGH FAULT 




Geology of the Commonwealth. 



243 



Relief Map ol 

AUSTRALIA 

Shewing Trend Lines. 

Constructed by 

W.K..M-I>ityre. 

Based on Maps and Contours 

by H.e. CRobinson. 




i'LAlIi i 



C.l'ilr.-i. 



Federal Haxdbook. 




Plate II. 



Relief Model of Australia and Tasmania, In W. K. .Mclntyro. 

showing the horst of Tasmania, with its high peaks of diabase sills, to left of the fault 
trough of Bass Strait, Mt. Kosciusko, 7,300 feet. Is just to the right of the light hand 
of the two small black shadows on the north side of Bass Strait, at the knotting point 
between the east and west trend lines of the southern coast of Victoria, and the more 
of less meridional trend lines of the east coast of Australia. To right of Kosciusko 
the Hunter Geocol is seen in front of and midway between the sharp peaks of the Warruni- 
bungle Mountains on the left, and the Nandewar Ranges on the right. Further to the 
light the dark patch crossing the range represents a narrow tongue of Jurassic sediments 
joining the large dark area of the main artesian basin to the plain of .Jurassic and Cre- 
taceous rock, also showing dark, lying along the middle area of the east Australian 
coast line. Further to the north-east is the steep-to riickland coast of north-eastern 
Queensland, rising in the Bellenden-ker Range to 5.428 feet. To the left of the main 
dark patch, showing the Central Artesian Basin, and between it and Tasmania the smaller 
dark patch indicates the Cainozoic plains of the Darling-Murray Rivers. Beyond the 
mouth of the Murray River is the long horst of the Mt. Lofty and Flinders Ranges, with 
Kangaroo Island at the extreme left, and the rift valley of Spencer's Gulf just above it. 
Above Sjiencer's Gulf is shown a narrow ridge, assumed to be formed of Palaozoie, or 
older rock, separating the Central Artesian Basin from the crescent-shaped dark area to 
the left, the Bight coastal plain, occupied by Older Tertiary marine Umestones overlying 
Cretaceous glauconite sandstones. It is possible that there is a narrow gap in this ridge 
making the main Cretaceous basin continuous with this coastal siib-artesian basin. To 
the right of and above the ridge is the sharp peak of Pre-Cambrian rock of Mt. Woodroffe, 
in the Musgrave Ranges. 

The rest of the continent, chiefly Pre-Cambrian, is a vast peneplain, from 1,000 
to 3,000 feet above sea-level. In the extreme south-west are block-faulted mountains, 
the Stirling Range, &c. Along the extreme western coast is a narrow coastal plain, 
scarcely visible on the model, from its present point of view, with the two dark promon- 
tories of Sharks Bay, near its northern end. Further to the right is the deeply dissected 
region of Pilbara, much block-faulted. Still further to the right, and immediately above 
the eastern half of the Tertiary basin of the Great Bight, near the north-west coast, is 
the depressed area of the Great Desert Ai'tesiau Basin, of Permo- Carboniferous age. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 245 



Bass Strait, as shown by the geological evidence, is another rift valley 
crossing the older " grain " of the country, and so is Torres Strait. 

A positive movement of the strand line by about 200 feet would re-unite 
Tasmania and Australia, and a positive movement of only about 100 feet 
would re-unite Australia and Papua. The latter might easily result from a 
negative movement of the ocean of about the above amount, such as probably 
occurred towards the culmination of the latest Ice Age, when the sea level 
in temperate and sub-tropical latitudes was probably 100 feet lower than 
at present, owing to the locking up of water to form the great ice sheets. 

The features of. Cape Leeuwin and Cape Naturaliste are certainly due to 

a heavy coastal trough fault just to their east, which in that south-west part 

of Western Australia has determined for a great distance the trend of the 

western coast line. (See Fig. 2.) 

Fig. 2.-- Section across the Great Trough Fault of Western Australia (vertical scale 

8,000 feet to an mch) from data suggested by A. Gibb-Maitland, F.G.S. 

. „ ^ Darlinq Range 

Fremantle Perth ]^ 

^ Indian Ocean ! ^ __ L . ■/^\'"\ 

Hobson's Bay, or Port Phillip, south of Melbourne, is probably on a 
meridional rift valley. 

The Hunter Valley and port of Newcastle are situated on a N-W. to 
S.E. rift valley. 

The whole of the Queensland coast coincident with the Great Barrier 
Reef for 1,200 miles N.N.W. from Rockhampton, owes its trend to powerful 
downthrows to the east, perhaps compensating for the epeirogenic move- 
ment of land to the west. 

The trend of the east and west shores of Tasmania is parallel to axes 
of folding. 

It is obvious that the south coast of Australia, as well as the whole of 
its north and north-west coast, is of an Atlantic type. On the contrary, the 
south-west coast of Western Australia, the east and west coast of Tasmania, 
and the north-east coast of Queensland are as regards their trends of a Pacific 
type. The south-east coast of Australia does not appear to be either wholly 
Atlantic or wholly Pacific. The term sub-Pacific has been suggested for it. 
As regards its geological structure, the Australian coast at Fremantle, near 
Perth, consists of a recent dune rock cemented by lime derived chiefly from 
remains of mollusca and Lithothamnion. Numbers of artesian wells sunk 
in this rock near Perth yield copious supplies of artesian water. Cretaceous 
rocks have been penetrated there at about 1,000 feet below sea-level. Similar 
calcareous dune rock forms the coast at Cape Northumberland, in South 
Australia, at Warrnambool, in Western Victoria, and at Sorrento, on 
the east side of the entrance to Port Phillip, but so far has not been proved 
to carry artesian water. 

Q2 



246 Federal Handbook. 



From Cape Naturaliste to Cape Leeuwin the coast is fcrmed of recent 
dunes resting on granite, while towards Albany a deeply indented coast of 
granite makes its appearance with dunes lodging in the hollows. Further 
eastwards, near Cape Riche, is a small basin of marine Jurassic rocks, while 
near Cape Arid, the coast is marked by the Recherche Archipelago mostly 
formed of ancient crystalline rocks. East of Cape Aiid to Fowler's Bay, 
in the direction of Eyre's Peninsula, the coast line is formed of nearly per- 
pendicular cliffs, up to 250 feet in height, with a further gentle rise inland 
towards the Nullarbor Plains, of about 290 feet. At the base they are formed 
of white chalky rock with Gryphcea and layers of flints, the whole capped 
by polyzoal and molluscan limestones. At present the whole of this series 
is attributed to some time between Eocene and Lower Miocene. At about 
900 feet below sea level, at the Madura bore, to the west of Eucla, the Tertiarv 
limestone rests on a thick series of Cretaceous greensands with a well preserved 
marine fauna. No rivers exist anywhere along this 500 miles of unbroken 
coast line, nor indeed along the further eastward extension of the coast for 
another 500 miles from Fowler's Bay to the head of Spencer's Gulf. As the 
rocks inland are mostly almost horizontal porous Tertiary limestones, there is 
no surface run-off of the rain water, but it sinks in swallow-holes to tortuous 
subterranean tunnels, by which it is discharged at the foot of the sea cliffs, 
or between tide marks or out at sea, as in the case of the catavothra of Greece. 
From Fowler's Bay around the headlands of Eyre's Peninsula and lower end 
of Spencer's Gulf, the coast line is formed partly of Tertiary sediments, partly 
of pre-Cambrian schists, gneiss and granite. The last-mentioned is well 
seen in the north and south Nep tunes at the entrance to St. Vincent's Gulf. 
A plain of erosion along the coast, part of a block faulted peneplain, crosses 
Yorke's Peninsula to the east side of St. Vincent's Gulf, and extends to the 
western side of the Mount Lofty Ranges. This coast is formed partly of 
Post Pliocene flood loams, containing remains of Pallimnarchus pollens, partly 
of richly fossiliferous Tertiary marine limestones, partly of Permo-Carbo- 
niferous glacial beds, and partly of the highly folded Cambrian series with 
their glacial beds. For general interest and variety this part of the coast 
line is probably unequalled elsewhere in Australia. The strand line has 
here recently undergone an emergence of 12 feet, and Port Adelaide and 
Port Wakefield are built on the land thus naturally reclaimed. This evidence 
of recent 12 feet emergence can be traced around the greater part of Aus- 
tralia, and is probably due to a eustatic negative movement of the ocean. 
Kangaroo Island is formed of Cambrian rocks, capped by Tertiaries and 
basalt at its east end. The Cambrian rocks continue along the coast east of 
Backstairs Passage to the mouth of the Murray River at Port Elliott. In 
the reclaiming, as the result of positive movement of the strand line, of the 
Tertiary basin which extends far inland from this part of the coast, the rivers 
Murray and Darling have become engrafted. 

From the mouth of the Murray to Cape Northumberland, the coast line 
is mostly formed of loose dune sand or consolidated dune sand like that of 
Cape Northumberland. The dune rock rests either on marine Tertiaries, 
or on recent allu vials of the Murray basin, or on small inliers of granite. 

Inland from Cape Northumberland are the recently extinct volcanoes of 
Mount Schanck, Mount Gambler, etc. From Cape Northumberland to east 



Geology op the Commonwealth. 



247 



1 / Xy - 







Geology of the Commonwealth. 249 

of Warrnambool the coast is similar with occasional outcrops of Tertiary- 
sediments capped by basaltic lava, until the Otway coast is reached. This 
is formed of freshwater Jurassic strata, in places containing small seams of 
coal. 

East of the dune rock of Sorrento, the Victorian coast is formed of Ter- 
tiary rocks and older basalt ; then of the G-ippsland coal measures in which 
the claw of a dinosaur and teeth and scales of ceratodus have lately been 
discovered ; then at Cape Liptrap the cliffs are partly Silurian and partly 
Ordovician slaty rocks, while at Wilson's Promontory they are of granite. 
Beyond Corner Inlet there follows to the north-east the long stretch of sands 
deposited in the slack water between the southerly flowing East Australian 
current, and the current flowing easterly out of Bass Strait. This sand 
has engrafted many of the rivers, and formed the Grippsland Lakes. Probably 
the reclamation has been helped by a positive movement of the strand line. 
At Gabo Island and Cape Howe granites form a riick-land coast, which 
continues with the addition of Ordovician, Silurian, and Devonian sediments to 
Moruya and Milton. 

To the north of Milton, the coast partakes more of the nature of a forland 
coast and a distinct coastal plain is developed, formed of the sediments of 
the Permo-Carboniferous and Triassic basins. This continues north for 
over 200 miles to Port Stephens. In its deeply indented estuaries, harbors, 
and drowned valleys, such as those of Jervis Bay, Port Hacking, Botany 
Bay, Port Jackson, Broken Bay, Port Stephens, etc., and in the entire absence 
of marine Tertiary deposits, this part of the strand line shows evidence of 
recent negative movement. From Jervis Bay to Wollongong, the strata 
in the sea-cliffs are rich in Permo-Carboniferous marine fossils, while those 
of BuUi and the cliffs 100 miles north, extending to Newcastle, show frequent 
coal seams, and abound especially near Newcastle in Permo-Carboniferous 
fossil plants. 

From Port Stephens to near Grafton, the coast is mostly of an indented 
type, with drowned valleys between hills coming close to the coast, with 
numerous bar harbors, and with a narrow coastal plain fringing Carboni- 
ferous, Devonian, and probably Ordovician strata. An outlying part of an 
immense belt of serpentine, intrusive into Middle Devonian radiolarian 
rocks, touches the coast at Port Macquarie. From the Clarence River to 
the Richmond there is a forland coast of Jurassic coal measures, the Clarence 
basin. A low indented riickland coast, again of Ordovician strata, cherts, 
tuffa, and quartzites, and capped by alkaline basalts and acid pitchstones 
stretches from Ballina to near the mouth of the Brisbane River. A for- 
land coast in part Jurassic, stretches from the Brisbane River to Gladstone. 
The interesting volcanic rocks, comendites, riebeckite trachytes together 
with alkaline andesites and basalts form conspicuous domes and sugarloaves 
a short distance inland from the coast, which is there fringed with dunes, the 
largest in Australia, up to 800 feet high. At Maryborough and Great Sandy 
Island marine Cretaceous rocks outcrop with a basin of productive coal (tlie 
Burrum Basin, the only basin of Cretaceous coal worked within the Com- 
monwealth) immediately overlying them. Fiom Gladstone to Cape York 
there is a remarkable coast, chiefly of the riick-land type, with mountain 
ranges from 2,000 feet up to over 5,000 feet high (Bellcndenker, 5,128 feet) 



250 Federal Handbook. 



coming mostly close to the coast line, and having high islands like Hinchin- 
brook, which rises to an altitude of 3,560 feet, close inshore. This part of 
the coast and coastal shelf is so heavily faulted and studded with small 
islands, which have survived the block faulting, as to deserve Suess' title 
of " panzer-horst." In places there is a coastal plain, as at the Jurassic (or 
Cretaceous (?) coal-basin of Broadsound, at Port Mackay, and to north- 
west and south-east of Townsville North), in others the old rocks, chiefly 
Carboniferous strata, with Lepidodendron and Phillipsia, or Devonian rocks 
with massive coral and stromatoporoid limestones, both systems intruded 
by granites, form bold clifis and headlands. This remarkable part of the 
coast line is opposite to the Grand Canal of Australia which runs between 
the Great Barrier Reef and the main land. These high coastal hills are 
obviously part of the Old Main Divide, its eastern slope with nearly all the 
easterly flowing rivers being faulted eastwards under the Barrier. This 
coast terminates in granite capped with the horizontal Upper Cretaceous 
desert sandstone, which forms Cape York. Throughout this great stretch 
of coast from Cape Howe to Cape York, a distance of 2,150 miles, marine 
Tertiary deposits are wholly unknown. From Cape York around the rocks 
of the Gulf of Carpentaria, the coast is of a low forland type, formed of Desert 
Sandstone at first then of late Tertiary and Post Tertiary freshwater deposits, 
with an inner zone of marine Cretaceous rocks. 

It is thought by some that the main submarine outlet of the Great Arte- 
sian Basin lies somewhere towards the southern shore of the Gulf of Car- 
pentaria. 

On the west side of the Gulf are numerous islands, formed of Permo- 
Carboniferous rock. A short distance inland from the mouth of the Roper 
River, the late Cainozoic sediments give place to Cambrian sandstones and 
limestones, the latter on the Daly River being largely formed of Salterella 
hardmani. These limestones are many thousands of feet thick, and rest 
on an older volcanic series. From here around to Darwin, the coast is formed 
chiefly of Cretaceo-Tertiaryand Permo-Carboniferous rocks, with an occasional 
low-lying outcrop of older Palaeozoic or Pre-Cambrian rocks. Proofs of 
recent positive movement of the strand line are everywhere evident except 
between Arnhem Bay, the English Company's Islands, and Cape Arnhem, 
where there appears to have been recent negative movement. Elsewhere 
upraised Post Tertiary muds with echinoderms and craj^h and banks of 
dead coral are clear proofs of recent positive movement of the strand. One 
of the most beautiful parts of the whole Australian coast is that at 
the north-east extremity of Arnhem Land. Tectonic disturbances are 
present as major faults running N.E. and S.W. These are crossed by 
minor faults throwing to north-east. At Point Charles lighthouse, near 
Darwin, rolled specimens of Ammonites and Scaphites occur in great 
numbers. 

At Port Darwin the coast is composed of whitish shales and sandstones 
containing numerous casts of Belem.nites, and in places consisting almost 
entirely of radiolaria. These were originally deposited at a considerable 
depth, which suggests a positive movement of this part of the coast of 
that amount since Upper Cretaceous time, the epoch to which these rocks 
belong. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 251 

The remainder of the coast line is described in less detail in 
Chapter III., by T. Griffith Taylor. Readers are referred to that 
chapter for an account of the other physiographic features of the Common- 
wealth. 

3. Palaeogeography and Present Relief. 

Reference to the photograph of the relief model of Australia and Tas- 
mania (Pis. I. and II.) shows the broad physical features of the Common- 
wealth, while the orographic map (PI. IV.) gives the actual contour lines, 
and the tectonic map (PI. III.) the chief trend lines. These maps, together 
with the sections (Plates VI. and VII.), show that Australia is essentially 
a vast peneplain. This has been in part abandoned by the ocean, in part 
warped upward or downward in arches and compensating troughs, and this 
warping has been accompanied by heavy fractures. The latest of the true 
fold mountains of Australia dates back to Carboniferous time, for although 
in the Gympie region of Queensland the Permo-Carboniferous rocks are 
steeply tilted, they are never closely folded as the Carboniferous rocks often 
are. Great peneplanation took place in Permo-Carboniferous (Permian) 
time, followed by a considerable transgression of the sea in a wide belt sweeping 
inland on either side of Sydney, then swinging northwards through Queens- 
land at least as far as Townsville. In Triassic and Jurassic time Tasmania 
with Bass Strait and Southern Victoria were covered by great lakes and 
swamps, in which the coal measures of that age were formed. Contem 
poraneously a vast lake stretched from at least as far east as Brisbane mor 
or less continuously to Lake Eyre, a distance of nearly 1,000 miles. It is 
not known yet how far this great lake stretched in a meridional direction, 
but it must have been of the order of at least 500 miles. Gondwana Land 
was probably still in existence as far as can be judged from the Australian, 
Indian, New Zealand, South American, and Antarctic evidence. Now in 
late Jurassic or Post Jurassic time supervened those gigantic intrusions of 
diabase (dolerite) on a scale perhaps unprecedented in geological history. 
These intrusions took the form of sills which dominate the whole physical 
features of Tasmania, the Karroo, Antarctica, and British Guiana. That 
these intrusions were connected \vith the sinking in of the Gondwana Land 
and consequent compensating warping up of the sea floor, and probably 
a further shallowing of the sea floor through submarine extrusions 
of the dolerite seems highly probable, and it may account for 
those world-wide transgressions of the oceans in Cretaceous time which 
Suess considers one of the most conclusive pieces of evidence in 
favour of the ocean surface at times undergoing an eustatic positive 
movement. 

Australia was no exception to the general rule of trausgi'essing epicon 
tinental seas of vast size in Cretaceous time. During the older Cretaceous 
(" Rolling Downs ") series, Austi-alia was perhaps severed, so far as the 
portion of the continent which is still preserved is concerned, by a sea stretch- 
ing from the Gulf of Carpentaria to the Great Australian Bight. The marine 
fauna of this sea is essentially that of a local Mediterranean. On the other 
hand, the Cretaceous rocks of the west coast of Western Australia have a 
cosmopolitan Cretaceous marine fauna closely resembling that of India. 



252 Federal Handbook. 



Thus the old land barrier which united East Australia and India in Permo- 
Carboniferous (Permian) time does not seem to have been wholly broken 
down in early Cretaceous time. 

In Upper Cretaceous time, marine conditions were largely replaced by 
lacustrine, the lake surfaces with small marine basins here and there covering 
about one-half of the whole area of Australia. During this period was deposited 
the so-called Desert Sandstone which at one time probably covered about 
three-quarters of the whole area of Queensland, one-third that of South 
Australia, and at least one-fifth of the total area of New South Wales. 

In early Miocene time a considerable portion of southern and north- 
western Victoria, part of north-western Tasmania, the extreme south-west 
corner of New South "Wales, a large area around St. Vincent and Spencer's 
Gulfs, and a still larger area at the head of the G-reat Australian Bight were 
submerged. It is important to note that the submergence crept inland as 
far as the surface of the peneplain at Lake Cowan, near Norseman, in Western 
Australia. Deposits of marine sponge spicules occur there superimposed 
on the peneplain. Some marine moUuscan remains have also been found 
resting on the old peneplain on the shores of Lake Cowan, but unfortunately 
the geological age of these shells has not yet been determined. The date 
of the vast peneplain of Western Australia, Northern Territory, and probably 
that of East Australia as well, depends largely on the determination of the 
age of these fossils. 

It has been argued that the Australian and Tasmanian peneplain survived 
without serious warping into Pliocene time. This provisional conclusion 
is based on the uniform character of the Pliocene flora as far as the few frag- 
ments of it preserved allow us to judge. This is thought to be due to the 
Australian land at this time over large areas being nearly reduced to sea 
level. That some warping of the peneplain had comnaenced probably as 
far back as the Oligocene, is proved by the fact that in Victoria the so-called 
" older basalts," of perhaps Eocene or Oligocene Age, are capped by the 
Lower Miocene marine beds, and there is evidence to show that Tasmania 
after being joined to Australia in early Tertiary times, was divided from 
the mainland by a strait in Middle Tertiary or early Pliocene time, then 
reunited or nearly reunited in late Pliocene or Pleistocene time, allowing 
the Tasmanian aborigines, ignorant of the building of sea-going canoes to 
migrate into Tasmania from the mainland. That the warping of the Aus- 
tralian and Tasmania peneplain was chiefly Post Miocene is proved by the 
locally folded and uplifted Lower Miocene beds in the Mount Lofty Ranges, 
near Adelaide. Also the latest great outburst of volcanic energy in all the 
States of the Commonwealth (except Northern Territory) took place in Post 
Miocene time. Moreover the glaciation of the Tasmanian highlands and 
those of south-east Australia, took place in late Pliocene or Pleistocene 
time, and these glaciations were almost certainly contemporaneous with 
accentuated crust warping, though it is not intended to suggest that there 
was necessarily a causal connexion between the two phenomena, though 
there possibly may have been. Next the existence of abundant remains 
of large herds of Pliocene or Pleistocene marsupials, some of elephantine 
proportions, in what are now low-lying arid regions, with the discovery of 
remains of the late Pliocene or Pleistocene crocodile Pallimnarchus pollens, 



353 




354 




Geology of the Commonwealth. 



255 



as far south as the valley of the Torrens, near Adelaide, demands a higher 
rainfall, warmer climate, and probably higher relief for the interior of Aus- 
tralia than it at present possesses. Then too, the canyons of the Upper 
Flinders, of the eastward-flowing New England rivers, like the Macleay, the 
Hastings, etc., and the canyons of the Blue Mountain rivers, the Shoalhaven 
River, etc., imply that no very great time has elapsed since the warping, 
otherwise the valley walls would be flared down and reduced to gentle slopes. 

All over the highlands of Tasmania, as well as over the Kosciusko plateau, 
there is evidence of a succession of G-lacial Epochs. These were probably 
synchronous with the recent maximum glaciation in Antarctica and in South 
America, possibly with the phases of the Great Ice Age in the Northern 
Hemisphere. 

Amongst the newest of the tectonic movements has been the development 
of the great tensional faults, which have so strongly block faulted the Flinders 
Range (see fig. 1) and the main Eastern Divide, especially along the Barrier 
Reef area, where as in the neighbourhood of Cairns, the upper end of the 
Barron River is left hanging on the upthrow side of the fault block (fig. 3). 
The fault which bounds the Darling Ranges of "Western Australia (fig. 2) 
on the west, probably is a development of very late Pleistocene or early 
Recent time. 

Fig. 3. — Sections across Queensland. 



Main Divide 
M'BaOleFrere 

5l58r Cairns 
Basalt 



Foundered and rractured East slope 
of Uie Old Divide E. 



Holmes Reef 
Creaf Barrier 
Reef 




4. Stratigraphical Features, 
(a) The Geological Succession in the Commonwealth of Australia. 



Group. 


System. 


Thickness 
in Feet. 


Representative Formations. 


POST- 

Tertiary 


Recent 


1,000 


1. River alluvium and sand dunes, with iiard 

calcareous dune rock. Aboriginal kitchen 
middens. Laterites ("pindan" gravels and 
nodular ironstone). Nodular tufaceous 
limestone (" kunkar "). Salt deposits and 
muds of the " playas." Active crater of 
Mount Victory in Papua ; recent craters 
of Mount Garabier (South Australia), Tower 
Hill, near Warrnambool (Victoria). The 
Great Barrier Reef of Queensland. 
^ maximum thickness of dune rock. 

2. Raised beaches, mostly 15 feet above sea 

around Australian coast. In Papua recent 
coral rock extciuls up to 2,000 feet above sea- 
Icvcl. Submerged peat beds about 100 to 200 
feet below sea to north of Sydney. 

3. Ilelicidce sandstone of Bass Strait Islands, and 

Ilelicidce limestone to west of Cloncurry, 
Queensland. 



256 



Federal Handbook. 



Stbatigraphical Features — Geological 8xjccessio^— continued . 



Group. 



Thirkness 

in Feet. 



Representative Formation? 



POST- 

Tebtiaby — 
continued. 



Pleistocene 



Tertiary 



Pliocene 



300 



Lower Plio- 
cene or 
Upper 
Miocene 



Miocene 



1,000 (?) 
1,000 



2,000 



100 (?) 



SO to 
1,000 



Several 
thou- 
sands 
of feet 
200 to 
1,500(?) 



Mesozoic 



Cretaceous — 
Upper . . 



Lower 



100 to 
300 



2,000 



4. Mammaliferous drift and old lake muds, with 

remains of Diprotodon, Nototherium thylacoleo, 
Thylacinus, Sarcophilus, Sus papuensis (in 
Queensland), together with Pallimnarchus 
pollens, Megalania prisca, Genyornis, Canis 
dingo, etc. In pla,ces these deposits may 
date back to late Pliocene. 

5. Glacial deposits of western Tasmania and of 

the Kosciusko plateau. 

6. Basalt sheets of the fissure eruptions in east 

and sonth-east Australia and Tasmania, 
Kangaroo Island (South Australia), and Bun- 
bury (Western Australia). These range from 
Pliocene through Pleistocene to Recent. 
Newer " deep leads " of alluvial gold and 
tin in eastern Australia and Tasmania. 

7. Older Marine Pliocene beds of Adelaide. 

Possibly Launceston Lake beds belong here. 
Port Moresby radiolarian cherts, etc. 



8. Belt of alkaline lavas and tuffs from Coleraine 

to Springsure, about 1,500 miles. Melilite 
and nepheline basalts of Tasmania. 

9. Ostrea slurti beds of the Lower Murray River. 

Lithothamnion limestone of HaUett's Cove, 
Adelaide. 
10. Cellepora gambierensi-" limestones passing into 
chalk with Hints, around the Bight. At 
Table Cape, Tasmania, the oldest Australian 
marsupial, Wynyardia bassiana, occurs in this 
formation. Lepidocyclina occurs in places. 
Purari lignitic and oil-bearing series, Papua, 
with abundant Lepidocyclina. 



11. Older basalts and tuffs, and the older, "deep 

leads " of Gippsland (Victoria), New South 
Wales, and southern Queensland. Much 
laterite and bauxite is associated with this 
series. 

12. Important brown coal serie.s of Victoria, with 

fossil plants and hgnites. At Morwell, in 
Gippsland, these lignites are 888 feet thick. 

13. Desert sandstone, mostly of freshwater origin, 

with thin seams of coal in places, passes 
downwards into radiolarian shales with 
belemnites. Ichthyosaurus occurs in the 
remarkable opal beds in this series. The 
sandstone is occasionally marine, with 
Rhynchonella croydonensis. 

14. Rolling downs formation, chiefly glauconitic 

sands and clays, with abundant foraminifera, 
Maccoyella, Cytherea, Crioceras, Lamna, 
Belonostomus, Notochelone, Ichthyosaurus, 
Plesiosaurus, ^chna flindersensis, Ammon- 
ite beds (Scapliites) of Darwin. The 
Alveolina limestones of New Guinea perhaps 
may be referred to this horizon. At Mary- 
borough, Queensland, the Burrum coal seams 
are interstratified in the marine series. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 



257 



Stratigraphigal Features — Geological Succession — continued. 



Group. 



System. 



Thickness 
in Feet. 



Representative Formations. 



Mesozoic — 
continued. 



Jurassic — 
Upper . . 



500 to 
1,000 

1,000 to 
3,000 



Triassic 



3,000 



PAL.a;ozoic . , 



Permo-Car- 

bonijerous 
{Permian) 



1,500 



2,200 

500 to 

1,800 

6,400 



100 to 
300 



4,800 



15. Diabase sills of Tasmania. 

16. Sandstones of the great artesian basin, with 

lignitic coal in places. At Leigh's Creek, 
south of Lake Eyre, a 47-ft. seam of brown 
coal in this series. Coal measures of Won- 
thaggi and Cape Otway Clarence Series, 
Clifton, Ipswich, Callide, and Broadsound. 
Quartz-trachyte tuffs of Brisbane. Tceniop- 
teris daintreei is specially characteristic, 
and cj^cadaceous forms like Otozamites, 
Pterophyllum, and Alethopterid sdso abundant. 
Unio eyrensis numerous. Claw of dinosaur 
in Victoria, also fossil ceratodus. In 
Western Australia and Papua marine 
Jurassic rocks occur with abundant ammon- 
ites. 

17. Productive coal measures of Tasmania. 

Phyllotheca present, with Thinnfeldia, Ale- 
thopteris, etc. Hawkesbury series of New 
South Wales, with abundant fossil fish, and 
large undescribed labyiinthodonts. Con- 
tains Beyrichia, abundant Estheria, Tre- 
manotus (? in situ). Much red and green 
tuff at base of series. 

18. Acid granites of New England. Alkaline series 

of Port Cygnet, Tasmania, and of Kiama, 
New South Wales. 

19. Upper or Newcastle coal measures, with 35 to 

40 feet workable coal. Glossopteris pre- 
dominates over Gangamopteris. Dadoxylon 
abundant. The Upper Bowen coal 
measures of Queensland, and Collie coal- 
field. Western Australia, probably are on 
this horizon. 

Derapsey Series. Barren freshwater strata. 

Middle coal measures (Tomago or East Mait- 
land), about 1,800 feet workable coal. 

Upper Marine Series, mudstones and sand- 
stones, with abundant Prodtictus brachy- 
thcerus, Crinoids, " glendonite " pseudo- 
morphs, occasional glacial erratics in shales, 
with abundant Fenestallidce. 

Lower or Greta coal measures, with about 
20 feet of workable coal. Gangamopteris 
predominates over Glossopteris. The Daw- 
son coal measures probably belong here, 
in Queensland, and the Mersey coal measures 
of Tasmania. 

Lower Marine Series, with Eurydesma cor- 
datum specially characteristic. Sodic basalts 
and andosite tuffs are interstratified. The 
series ends in glacial beds ."JOO foot thick. 
In Victoria tluire are the Bacciuis Marsh 
beds, over 2,000 feet thick, with at least 
four beds of true tillite. At Wynyard, in 
Tasmania, and Hallott's Cove, near 
Adelaide, these tiliitos are very well 
developed. In Victoria and South Australia 
the tillites rest on beautifully striated 
pavements. 



258 



Federal Handbook. 



Stratigraphical Features — Geological Succession — continued. 



Group. 



Thickness 
in Feet. 



Representative Formations. 



Pal^ozoic- 

continued. 



(Unconfor- 
mity.) 

Carhoni- 
ferous. 



20,000 



Devonian — 
Upper . . 



Middle. 



Lower. 



10,000 



9,000 



14,000 



Silurian . . 



(Unconfor- 
mity.) 
Ordovician 



3,000 to 
5,000 



9,000(?) 



The Gympie beds of Queensland are Lower 
Marine. 

20. Sphene-granites of New England. 

21. Blue-granites of New England. 

22. Star Series of Queensland, with Lepidodendron 

australe, Aneimites, and Phillipsia. 
The marine and freshwater beds in New South 
Wales, with Phillipsia, Productus semi- 
reticulatus, Lepidodendron australe, L. volk- 
mannianum, L. veltheimianum, Rhacho- 
pteris, etc. A thick series of acid, to inter- 
mediate lavas and tuffs, occur in this system. 
In Victoria the Mansfield beds and the 
Grampians sandstones may be included 
here, together with the felsites and basalts 
of Mount Wellington, Victoria. 

23. Serpentine belt of New England, New South 

Wales. 

24. Spirifera disjuncta quartzites of Mount 

Lambie, New South Wales, with Lepido- 
dendron australe. The Archaeopteris sand- 
stones of Victoria may belong here. 

Radiolarian cherts, reef limestones, and spUites 
of Tamworth, New South Wales. Burdekin 
series of Queensland, with reef limestone up 
to 7,000 feet thick, an ancestor of the Barrier 
Reef. Buchan and Bindi limestones of 
Victoria, with andesites. Devonian rocks 
of Kimberley, Western Australia. 

Murrumbidgee series. New South Wales, with 
Receptaculites and bony-plated fish like 
Asterolepis, also a thick series of acid to 
intermediate lavas. In Victoria are the 
series of acid lavas and tuffs, the Snowy 
River porphyries. Dacites, quartz- porphy- 
ries, and granodiorites of this age occur in 
Victoria. Most of the granites of Tasmania 
are thought to be Devonian. Devonian 
rocks occur in Papua. 

25. Shales, sandstones, limestones, contemporan- 

eous tuffs. The type area is Yass, New 
South Wales. Hausmannia and Encri- 
nurus, with the corals Rhizophyllum and 
Mucophyllum and Pentaynerus knightii 
are characteristic. At the base of series is 
Halysites in great abundance. At Lilydale 
in Victoria, Chudleigh in Tasmania, Chil- 
lagoe in Queensland, limestones of this age 
are well developed. They are frequently 
associated with radiolarian cherts. 



26. These rocks are either littoral, like the Tempe 
Downs beds, south of the Macdonnell Range, 
with Asaphus and Endoceras abundant, or 
are of the Victorian type, black shales, sand- 
stones, graptolitic shales, wath some sponge 
spicules, phosphatic slates, and cherts. They 
are also developed in New South Wales 
at TaUong, Mandurama, etc. The rich grapto- 
lite fauna is described later in this article. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 



259 



Stratigraphical Features — Geological Succession — continued. 



Group. 



System. 



Thickness 
in Feet. 



Representative Formations. 



Pal.s:ozoic — 
continued, 



Cambro- 
Ordovi- 
cian {?) 



Cambrian 



10,000(?) 



Pbe- 

Cambrian 



(Great Un- 
conformity.) 
Algonkian 



Archaean 



27. These rocks consist of the diabases and tuffs, 

probably spilitic, of Heathcote and other 
areas in Victoria. Probably the porphy- 
roid series with breccias, tuffs, etc., of 
western Tasmania also belong here. 

28. This system is chiefly developed in South 

Australia and Northern Territory. In Nor- 
thern Territory thick sandstones overlie 
massive Archceocyathince limestones, perhaps 
7,000 feet in thickness, another forerunner 
of the Barrier Reef. Beneath the richly 
fossiliferous limestones (Salterella limestones 
of Northern Territory) is a vast thickness of 
basalts and basic tuffs. About half-way up 
in the series in South Australia are tillites 
up to about 1,000 feet in thickness. 



29. The Mosquito Series of the Pilbara gold- 

field, Western Australia, is a schistose group 
unconformably underlying the Cambrian(?) 
NuUagine Series. This in turn rests on an 
older series, the Warrawoona. Both may 
be considered Algonkian, as the rocks can 
be recognised as Sediments. 

At Kalgoorlie the conglomerates are Algon- 
kian, as are those of Goat Island, Tasmania, 
with mica schists and garnet-zoizite- 
amphibolites ; in the Mount Lofty and 
Flinders Ranges the rocks of the Houghton 
magma, so rich in titaniferous iron and 
diopside, and connected with radium 
deposits are also probably Algonkian. 

The Glenelg River schists and ]\Iitta Mitta 
schists of Victoria may also be Algonkian, 
as well as most of the mica and quartz 
schists of Northern Territory. 

30. Archaean rocks are widely spread in Western 

Australia in the Musgrave and Macdonnell 
Ranges, and at Port Lincoln, in South Aus- 
tralia, and between Camooweal and Borra- 
loola, in Northern Territory. The Aguilar 
Range in Queensland, north of Brisbane, con- 
taining glaucophane schists may also be 
Archaean, as well as the main axis of British 
and German New Guinea. 



(b) Pre=Cambrian System. 

The rocks of this age, comprising both Algonkian and Archaean formations, 
are developed on a particularly grand scale in Western Australia and Central 
Australia, in fact, about one-third of the whole area of Australia, namely 
approximately 800,000 square miles, is occupied by this vast crystalline com- 
plex. Pre-Cambrian rocks are also developed in the Kimberley gold-field 
of Western Australia, as well as at Darwin, extending from the latter at 
intervals to Camooweal in Queensland. In New South Wales, they are 
represented by a belt of Garnetiferous mica-schist with amphibolites and 



260 



Federal Handbook. 



gneiss in the Barrier Ranges of the Broken Hill silver-field. They are repre- 
sented by schists near the Cobar Copper Mines of New South Wales, and 

Fig 4. Diagrammatic Sections ACROSS CoLUE- Stirling Trough 

Vertical Scale 8000 Feet to an inch 

M'Toolbrunup. 3341*^ 



Collie Coal Reld 

J. .^Looking WN.W ^ 
Fault ^ Fa 

tttV 



STIRLING 



RANGE 




CNElSSlC 
CRAMITE 



\ \ 




by a thick series of crystalline schists in a broad belt of country stretching 
S.S.E. from Wodonga and Tallangatta, through Omeo and Tongio West in 
North-east Victoria. Other areas occur in Victoria south of Mount Stavely 
and in the basin of the G-lenelg River. In Tasmania, a well-marked belt 
of mica-schist and white saccharoidal quartzite, and a very interesting belt 
of zoisite-amphibolite, are ascribed to this group. With the exception of 
the last-mentioned rock, all the Pre-Cambrian rocks of Tasmania appear 
to have been of sedimentary origin, and should therefore be referred to the 
Algonkian system. In Western Australia, the group is divisible into two 
portions, or we may say that two groups are present : Firstly, an older 
form of gneisses and acidic schists with intrusive granite and pegmatite 
veins with numerous dykes of diorite, norite, dolerite, etc. Secondly, Algon- 
kian rocks formed of coarse conglomerates together with, in places, altered 
volcanic tuffs and amygdaloidal dolerites, the latter evidently being of 
contemporaneous origin. The principal gold-fields of Western Australia, 
one of which alone (Kalgoorlie) has produced to date over £100,000,000 
worth of gold, are situated in rocks, probably of this group, occupying deeply 
infolded basins, partly of Pre-Cambrian basic lavas and tuffs, in the older 
crystalline complex. As shown on the Section, Fig. 4, these Pre-Cambrian 
rocks have been intensely folded, the trend of the folds being nearly meri- 
dional, but on the whole ha\'ing the form as shown on the PI. III. of a 
very open inverted letter " S." One can distinguish at least four of these 
great gold-bearing basins from east to west in the following order : — Kanowna, 
Boulder and Kalgoorlie, Coolgardie, and Southern Cross. In the Pilbara 
district of Western Australia, there is a considerable development of minerals 
of the rare earths associated with veins of pegmatite traversing Pre-Cam- 

FiG 5. Sketch roughly diagrammatic from Perth to Kalgoorlie. 

, ^ Suggested b^obsfcvationsorA Gibb-Maitland.FGS 






"th DARLING RANGE ^ 1 ■ PENEPLAIN r ^^S^ f/ ,'//' 



390miles- 



brian rocks. For example, associated with tin-stone are found in this region 
tantalite in sufficient quantity to control the whole of the tantalum market 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 261 

of the world. The mineral gadolinite, associated with well-crystallized 
monazite, and occasionally the rare radio-active mineral pilbarite, a lead- 
bearing uranium ore, are also met with within this area. At Mount Painter 
between the head of Spencer's Gulf and Lake Eyi'e, the Pre-Cambrian rocks 
comprise remarkably massive deposits with coarse mica-schists, containing 
an abundance of sapphire. These rocks are traversed by a huge lode con- 
taining radio-active minerals, such as monazite, torbenite, autunite, etc., 
together with a considerable amount of fluorspar. This lode has been traced 
along a continuous outcrop of over a mile, and in places is said to be over 
20 yards in width — in places as much as 50 yards. At present the lode is 
only being prospected. At the Radium Hill, at Olary, on the railway line 
from Adelaide to Broken Hill, there is a considerable deposit of uranium- 
bearing titaniferous iron ore. At the surface outcrop this is stained lemon- 
yellow to orange by carnotite. The ore from this mine is at present being 
successfully treated at Woolwich, Sydney, and it is expected that it will soon 
be possible to produce not less than a gramme of radium bromide annually 
from this mine alone. In the MacDonnell Ranges, associated with the 
pegmatite dykes are large crystals of muscovite mica, from 1 foot up to 18 
inches or more in diameter. Beryls in large crystals, but not of commercial 
value, occur in the same region. A remarkable rock in the Pre-Cambrian 
group is that known as the ribbon jasper. This rock, often many hundreds 
of yards in width, is typically a beautifully banded haematitic quartz rock. 
It can be traced for hundreds of miles along the gold-bearing belts of Western 
Australia. From its southern gold-fields, as far north as Kimberley gold-field, 
wherever reefs of quartz intersect it they are usually gold-bearing. Recent 
petrological research proves that this ribbon jasper is actually a mylonized 
quartz-dolerite, subsequently altered by silicification. It is singular that 
in other places as at Boulder, near Kalgoorlie, a similar mylonized quartz- 
dolerite has been converted into a graphite schist, probably as the result 
of long-continued emanations of methane. This gas is still being evolved 
from the gold telluride-bearing graphite-schists at the Great Boulder Pro- 
prietary Mine. At Bimbowrie, in South Australia, magnificent crystals of 
chiastolite, used for jewellery are abundantly developed in the Pre-Cambrian 
rocks. To the east of the Mount Lofty Ranges, in South Australia, there 
is a considerable development of andalusite-bearing schists, with which 
are associated schistose diopside-diorite. The latter rock is very rich in 
ilmenite, and black sands derived from this ilmenite are plentifully dis- 
tributed throughout the basalt rocks of the succeeding Cambrian formation. 
Reference has already been made to the considerable development of Pre- 
Cambrian rocks in the neighbourhood of the Broken Hill silver mines. No 
attempt has a.s yet been made to form even a rough approximation of the 
thickness of the Pre-Cambrians, but it certainly must be very vast. 

(c) Cambrian System. 

Rocks of this age are developed on a grand scale in the northern part 
of Northern Territory, as well as between Lake Eyre and Kangaroo Island, 
to the south of Adelaide. They are also probably represented by the Nulla- 
gine series in the Pilbara region. At that gold-field, conglomerates perhaps 
of Cambrian age overlie quite uncomformably the older schists. These 



262 Federal Handbook. 



conglomerates contain gold and small diamonds, and are the oldest diamond- 
bearing horizon as yet proved within the Commonwealth. In the Northern 
Territory, in Arnhem Land, and in the Barclay Tableland, the Cambrian 
rocks there, largely formed of limestones, have proved invaluable as a source 
of supply of sub-artesian water. These limestones in the Northern Territory, 
at the Daly River, as well as at Mount Panton, in the Kimberley gold-field, 
are rich in the fossil pteropod — Salterella hardmani. Their thickness is cer- 
tainly several thousands of feet, possibly 7,000 feet. In Arnhem Land and 
at Eamberley, these limestones overlie thick sheets of basic lavas, apparently 
contemporaneous in these Cambrian deposits. The two salient points of 
scientific interest about the system as developed in the Commonwealth are : — 
First, the development on a grand scale of glacial tillite. It has now been 
demonstrated that these glacial beds are in places fully 1,000 feet in thickness 
and extend from the Sturt Gorge, east of Adelaide, at least as far north as 
Pekina, to the north of Port Augusta, and may extend almost to the tropic 
of Capricorn, near Lake Eyre. The glacial beds of South Australia cross 
into New South Wales in the Barrier Ranges, about 20 miles north of Broken 
Hill. These glacial beds are met with about half-way up in the great thick- 
ness of Cambrian strata, and are many thousands of feet below the second 
feature about to be described, namely, the Archaeocyathinae limestones. 
These rocks are developed on a large scale at Yorke's Peninsula, to the west 
of Adelaide, as well as near Normanville and the Onkaparinga Valley, whence 
they extend at least as far north as the Blinninan and Ajax Mines, near Lake 
Eyre. They contain a rich and exquisitely preserved fossil marine fauna. 
It may be mentioned that small pieces of similar limestone were discovered 
by Sir Ernest Shackleton near Mount Darwin, about 360 miles from the 
South Pole. 

The Heathcotian Series. 
Shales and mudstones containing the trilolites Dinesus and Notasaphus, 
Protospongia and other sponge spicules, brachiopods and railiolaria occur 
about 3 miles north of Heathcote. These were originally referred to the 
Cambrian and later to the Ordovician. Recent evidence tends to reinforce 
their Cambrian age. Immediately underlying these beds to the east, come 
a mixed series of black cherts, cherty shales, and igneous rocks, principally 
basic lavas, described as diabases, tufis, and agglomerates, with a few minor 
dioritic intrusions and a larger intrusive mass of micro-granite. To these 
rocks the term Heathcotian has been applied, and they have been described 
as underlying the Dinesus beds with a marked unconformity, and have been 
referred to the Pre-Ordovician and even to the Pre-Cambrian series. Others 
have pointed out that there is no evidence of unconformity between them 
and the overlying Ordovicians, but a gradual passage, and that therefore 
they cannot be older than Cambrian and may be Cambro-Ordovician 
in age. Similar rocks, with similar stratigraphical relations, and 
containing black cherts with Protospongia and radiolaria interbedded 
with diabases occur to the north-east of Lancefield. Probably the 
diabases and cherts of Mount Major, near Dookie ; of Mount Stavely, and 
of the Hummocks, in the west of Victoria, are also referable to the 
Heathcotian series. 



Geology op the Commonwealth. 



263 



In Tasmania, Cambrian rocks of the nature of yellow rusty friable sand- 
stones and quartzites occur at Caroline Creek, between Railton and Latrobe, 
as well as on the Humboldt Divide, and in the Florentine Valley. These 
rocks, which contain well preserved casts of Dikellocephalus, are considered 
to be of Upper Cambrian age. 



w. 



Fig. 6. — Diasrammatic Sections across Victoria. 






.r 



/'4 



I I I \ I ] ' ' ' i ' ■-, I \' I [Snowy Xirtrt \ 




Ve3thcoti'3n/C3mbri3n) ^Serpentine 
■^50 Milts 













In Tasmania the Porphyroid Series of schistose quartz-porphyries, 
felsite tufis and breccias, and spilitic basic rocks, of the Leven Gorge, 
Dundas, is presumably of Heathcotian, and therefore perhaps of Cambrian 



(d) Ordovician System. 

Two well-marked t}'pes, the one littoral, the other probably pelagic, 
are referred to this system. Shallow water strata of the former type have 
been described from the Tempe Downs Station and the Levi Range, to the 
south of the MacDonnell Ranges. These rocks show ripple marks and sun 
cracks, as well as cubical pseudomorplis in quartzite after rock-salt. Abun- 
dant well-preserved fossils, of which the commonest forms are Orihis leviensis, 
Endoceras warburtoni, Asaphus illarensis, are to be found in this neighbour- 
hood in sandy calcareous shales. The other type of Ordovician rock, the 
dominant type in fact, consists of black carbonaceous shales and slates, 
with bands of fine-grained sandstones and quartzites and occasional con- 
glomerates. They are best developed in Victoria where they are closely 
folded and strike generally in a N.N.W. direction. They are divided into 
a lower series, in which the black shales and slates on the whole predominate, 
and an upper aeries in which sandstones are more prominent, and containing 
C.12154. 8 



264 Federal Handbook. 



basal conglomerates as at Kerrie, east of Mount Macedou. The lower member 
has been divided by its graptolite zones into the following divisions from 
above downward : — 

Darriwil series, 

Castlemaine series, 

Bendigo series, 

Lancefield series. 
The most productive gold-fields of Victoria, such as those of Bendigo, Bal- 
larat, Daylesford, iMaldon, Dunolly, Poseidon, and Steiglitz occur in Lower 
Ordovician rocks, near intrusions of granodiorite. It has been suggested 
that the quartz reefs are generally most productive where traversing black 
shales of the Bendigo series. The Lower Ordovician rocks have so far only 
been found in Victoria, and with the exception of the Mornington Peninsula, 
only to the west of a line running north from MelboiU'ne and stretching to 
the western boundary of the State. The Upper Ordovician rocks are, on 
the whole, less closely folded than the lower series, are less auriferous, but 
have a generally similar N.N.W. strike, and occur only to the east of a line 
running north from Melbourne. Near Melbourne they occur at Diggers Rest, 
and further north at Kerrie, east of Mount Macedon. Inliers of Upper 
Ordovician rocks occur near the Woods Point gold-field, and also further 
east, surrounded by the broad belt of Silurian rocks, while very extensive 
areas in Eastern Victoria have yielded only Upper Ordovician graptolites. 

Northwards from Victoria the Upper Ordovician rocks extend into New 
South Wales, sweeping in a broad belt to the east of Mount Kosciusko, between 
the Snowy River and Cooma. A belt of the same rock has been identi- 
fied at Tallong, near Marulan, where it has been shown there is a great uncon- 
formity between this system and the overlying Silurian system. At Cadia. 
near Orange, there is a great belt of these rocks containing contemporaneous 
andesite lava, with large deposits of iron ore. Though extensive, these 
are not as large by any means as the great ironstone mountain deposits — 
the ton Knob and the Iron Monarch — to the west of Port Augusta, from 
which the ore is to be obtained in the near future to supply the large steel 
works about to be erected at Newcastle. In Tasmania, strata of Ordovician 
age are represented at the Beaconsfield gold-field, near Launceston. 

(e) Silurian System. 

Strata of this age appear to be wholly restricted in the Commonwealth 
to the eastern portion of Australia and to Tasmania. In Tasmania they 
are well developed in the neighbourhood of the Mount Lyell Mine, where 
they contain the trilobite Homalonotus. The strata in Victoria are divided into 
the Upper orYeringian and the Lower or Melboui'nian series. At Lilydale,in 
Victoria, there is a well preserved marine fauna in the limestones of that 
locality. These strata are not so strongly folded as those of the Ordovician 
System. Perhaps the richest fossil-bearing locality for the Silurians is to be 
found in the Yass district of New South Wales. The rocks there consist of 
contemporaneous dacite tufis with sandy shales, olive coloured to yellowish 
brown shales and numerous beds of limestone. The limestones are built up of a 
rich coral fauna. In fact, they are obviously old fringing coral reefs. One 
of the most common and characteristic corals is the mushroom shaped form. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 265 

Mwophyllum. Penta)nerus is veiy plentiful near the limestones in the middle 
system. Halysites is very common and characteristic in the lower lime- 
stones of the system, being so abundant at Spring Creek, near Orange, and 
at Molong, as to constitute by itself coral reefs. In the upper strata the 
trilobites Hausrnannia and Encrinurus occur plentifully. The famous 
Jenolan caves of New South Wales have been hollowed out of limestones 
rich in Petitamerus. These are capped by massive black cherts, chiefly 
composed of radiolaria. At the limestone reefs at Wellington, New South 
Wales, beautifully preserved siliceous sponges allied to Astylospongia may 
be collected, weathered out of the surface of the limestone. Silurian rocks 
so far have been identified in Queensland only in the neighbourhood of Chillagoe, 
where limestones containing Halysites are developed. At the same time 
it is considered probable that a belt of Silurian extends through Queensland, 
from the south of Boulia to the extreme north-west, and from 20 miles east 
of Cloncurry to the western boundary of the State. The Stirling Range, 
in the south-western portion of Western Australia, has been doubtfully re- 
ferred to this period. 

(f) Devonian System. 

This is the oldest system in the Commonwealth in which definite fossil 
plants have been discovered, and such give evidence of a great extension 
of the land surface of Australia in an easterly direction since the close of 
Pre-Cambrian time. They occur at intervals all the way round from Kim- 
berley to Cloncurry, the Burdekin basin, the Tamworth area, the region 
west of the Blue Mountains between Mudgee and Bowenfels, as well as in a 
parallel strip near Wellington, Spring Creek, near Orange, and Canowindra. 
They are also represented at the Yalwal gold-field, to the south of the Illa- 
warra District, as well as on a large scale at Burrinjuck, and also in the 
Pambula regions. In addition, outlying patches of Devonian rock occur 
at Cobar, Oxley's Tableland, Gundabooka Mountain, and White Cliffs, 
beyond Wellington. Southwards they can be traced into Victoria, as the 
Snowy River porphyries and the Buchan and Bindi limestones and the 
Tabberabbera shales. No undoubted Devonian rocks have as yet been 
proved in Tasmania, in South Australia, or in Western Australia south of 
Kimberley. The system is divisible into three series. The lower is often 
chiefly volcanic, consisting of banded rhyolites and tuffs. These are asso- 
ciated with reddish-purple to chocolate coloured shales. In places the 
volcanic rocks become basic. In the neighbourhood of Burrinjuck and 
higher up the Murrumbidgee River, near Taemas, there is a splendid develop- 
ment of folded Lower Devonian limestones. A conspicuous and charac- 
teristic large fossil in these rocks is the form Receptaculites. Remains of 
large bony-plated fish, such as Coccosteus and Asterolepis, have been found 
in these limestones. In Victoria, the Buchan and Bituli limestones occupy 
eroded hollows in the surface of the Snowy River porphyries. The Gram- 
pian Range of white, grey, red, and purple sandstones and conglomerates 
perhaps belongs to the Upper Devonian beds. The conglomerates, sand- 
stones, and shales of Mansfield, Victoria, are perhaps of Upper Devonian 
age. In New South Wales, Middle Devonian rocks are well represented 
in the Tamworth region by massive coralline limestone, in which the curious 

s 2 



266 Federal Handbook. 



type Sanidophyllum is a dominant form. Associated with the limestones 
is a vast thickness, about 9,000 feet, of tufaceous cherty shales, with con- 
cretions of radiolarian limestones. In some of these the radiolaria are 
exquisitely preserved. Interbedded in the shales are numerous casts of 
Lepidodendron australe. In Queensland the chief development of Devonian 
rocks is in the Burdekin basin. There they consist of very massive con- 
glomerates at the base, passing upwards into coral reef limestones of vast 
thickness. On the Manning River they are no less than 7,000 feet thick. 
The most characteristic fossils are Pachypora meridionalis and Stromatoporella. 
With these are associated fossil plants such as Dicranophyllum, as well as a 
remarkable undescribed form. Upper Devonian rocks are mostly represented 
by reddish to grey quartzites, sandstones, and red shales. They are typically 
developed at Mount Lambie, Mount Walker, and Spring Creek, near Orange, 
New South Wales. These strata are very rich in Spirifera disjuncta and 
Rhynchonella pleurodon. Lastly, at Kimberley, in Western Australia, there 
is a belt of marine Devonian rocks containing a fauna which suggests that 
it may be of Middle Devonian age. 

(g) Carboniferous System. 

With perhaps the exception of a small belt of rocks at Kimberley, which 
is rumoured to contain Lepidodendron, and the G-rampians sandstones in 
Western Victoria, which have recently yielded forms of Lingula and fish 
remains similar to those of the Mansfield rocks, no rocks of this age are known 
to be developed in Australia, to the west of a line joining Cape York with 
Melbourne. No trace of Lepidodendron has as yet been found in Tasmania. 
The genus is widely represented in Queensland, where much of the folded 
highlands of the north-eastern coast ranges are built up of these rocks. 

The latest folding to which the earth's crust in Australia has been sub- 
jected belongs to late Carboniferous time. So far no marked unconformity 
has been traced between the Devonian and Carboniferous rocks. Rocks of 
true Carboniferous age in the Commonwealth are characterized by the pre- 
sence in their lower strata of Lepidodendron volhnannianum, L. veUheimianum 
and L. dichotomum, and in their upper portion by several species of Rhachop- 
teris and Aneimites. So far no single example of a Lepidodendron has been 
found anywhere in the Commonwealth in rocks of so-called Permo-Car- 
boniferous age. A marine fauna is associated with this system particularly 
in its lower and middle portions. An important form to distinguish the 
Carboniferous rocks from the Devonian on the one hand, and the Permo- 
Carboniferous on the other, is Phillipsia. So far no trace of trilobites has 
ever been observed in any of the true Permo-Carboniferous rocks. Michelinia 
and Lithostrotion found in New England are essentially Carboniferous forms 
which never ascend into the Permo-Carboniferous systems. Less reliance 
can be placed on the brachiopods, many of which, such as Prodiictus semireticu- 
latus, Orthis, and Streptorhyncuhs, &c., ascend into the Permo-Carboniferous 
system. 

The upper series of the Carboniferous system is characterized by a vast 
thickness of lavas and tufis, mostly acidic, such as rhyolites and ceratophyi'es 
associated with hypersthene andesites and hornblende andesites and magne- 
tite-sandstones. Intrusions of granites and quartz-porphyiies occur on a 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 267 

grand scale in this system, and it may be assumed that the rhyolites and 
other acid lavas are the volcanic representatives of the granite batholiths. 
As regards local development, Carboniferous strata formed of reddish shales 
and sandstones are most typically developed in Victoria, near Mansfield. 
They there contain Lepidodendron australe with an abundance of fossil 
fi^h such as Gyracanthides murrayi, Acanthodes australis, Eupleiirogmus 
cresswelli, Strepsodus decipiens, Ctenodus breviceps, Elonichthys sweeti, 
E. gibbus. It may be mentioned that it has been proposed to place these 
beds in the Upper Devonian, the occurrence of Lepidodendron australe, the 
the most characteristic of our Devonian plants, suggesting this possibility ; 
but at present the Victorian geologists prefer to class these strata as Lower 
Carboniferous. The occurrence of Lepidodendron australe in beds of un- 
doubted Carboniferous age in the Star series of Queensland seems to justify 
this classification. 

In New South Wales the Carboniferous system is about 20,000 feet 
in thickness, and extends in a wide folded belt from Port Stephens 
northwards into New England, reaching the Queensland border near the 
Horton River. 

(h) Permo=Carboniferous (Permian) System. 

Of all the sedimentary formations developed in the Commonwealth this 
system is perhaps the most interesting by reason, in the first place, of the 
wonderful evidence of past ice action ; in the second place, on account of 
the remarkable development of the Glossopteris and Gangamopteris flora 
which replaced everywhere within the Commonwealth the Lepidodendron 
flora of the preceding system ; and, in the third place, this system is specially 
interesting on account of its marine fauna, which belongs to two sharply 
differentiated types — the western, allied to the Permo-Carboniferous fauna 
of India ; and the eastern, a distinct faima unlike, in many respects, any 
developed in other parts of the world. It is also interesting on account of 
the fact that probably nowhere else in the world are the strata of the Permo- 
Carboniferous system of such thickness, or so rich in diversified forms of 
animal life. It is not proposed to discuss the Palaeontology of this system 
here, as Mr. W. S. Dun has given a summary of it at the end of this article, 
and details are given in the handbooks for the various States. 

In regard to the upward passage from the Carboniferous strata into the 
Permo-Carboniferous, it may be said that, while there is little evidence of 
unconformity in some places, in others the unconformity is fairly strongly 
marked ; as, for example, near Lochinvar in the Hunter Valley of New 
South Wales. At the same time, the unconformity is not nearly as strong 
as that developed in the British Isles, between the dolomitic breccias of the 
Permian system, and the Carboniferous rocks. 

It has already been stated that the Carboniferous strata in the Common- 
wealth are mostly disposed in fairly close folds. On the other hand, the 
strata in the Permo-Carboniferous system are either perfectly horizontal 
or disposed in broad open troughs and arches. Only in the case of the strata 
at Drake and Undorcliff in Now England and of the Ashford areas in New 
South Wales, and the Gympie area in Queensland, are the strata of this 
system highly disturbed near granitic intrusions. 



268 Federal Handbook. 



In regard to tlie term " Permo-Carboniferous," in view of the present 
state of our knowledge it is somewliat of a misnomer. The term was applied, 
in the first case, by Messrs. R. L. Jack and R. Etheridge, jun., to certain 
strata in Queensland, which undoubtedly did unite between themselves forms 
of life, chiefly marine, partly characteristic of the Carboniferous, partly of 
the Permian. It is now known that in Queensland these rocks can be sharply 
divided into two groups, viz. : an older group, in which Lepidodendron and 
Phillipsia are present ; and a younger group, in which neither of the above 
fossils ever occur, but which contains a marine fauna distinctly comparable 
with that of the Hunter River region of New South Wales. In spite of the 
fact that some of the brachiopods of this Permo-Carboniferous system show 
aflSnities with those of the Carboniferous, it appears to the writer that there 
is no longer need for the retention of the term Permo-Carboniferous, but 
that the strata of this system should be considered to be Permian for the 
following reasons : — 

(1) At the very base of the system is a thick and widely developed 
series of beds of glacial origin, which can be certainly cor- 
related with the Dwyka beds of South Africa in the Karroo 
system, also with the Talchir beds in India, as well as with the 
glacial strata known as the Orleans Conglomerate of the Santa 
Catharina system of South Brazil and of the Argentine. 
Now, in South Africa the marine reptile Mesosaurus is found in strata 
conformably overlying the gracial beds of the Dwyka series, so that, pre- 
sumably, this reptile was more or less contemporaneous with the Dwyka 
ice age. Similarly, in Southern Brazil, we meet with remains of Mesosaurus in 
strata conformably overlying the Orleans conglomerate. Still further north 
we encounter the well-marked Permian fossil Schizodus, and other marine 
forms, in shaly strata apparently on the same geological horizon as that 
containing the above reptile. 

If, therefore, Mesosaurus, a powerful marine swimmer and therefore a 
rapid migrator, is really Permian, then the Orleans conglomerate and the 
Dwyka conglomerate are also of approximately this age. 

(2) We find that in Russia, in the neighbourhood of Moscow, a flora 
rich in Glossopteris and Gangamopteris, as shown by Amalitzky, 
overlies sandstones, marls, &c., which at Brasnoborsk contain 
Bakewellia ceratopJiaga, Schl., and Schizodus rossicus, Vern. 
All the above strata in Northern Dwina are considered by 
Kohen to be referable to the Zechstein. 
But while the term Permian might probably be substituted with advan- 
tage for the term Permo-Carboniferous in Eastern Australia, it is doubtful 
whether it is equally applicable to the so-called Carboniferous rocks of Western 
Australia, in the Kimberley District In other parts of Western Australia, 
where so-called Permo-Carboniferous rocks are developed, as at the Gascoyne, 
Wooramel, and Minilya Rivers, a well-marked glacial horizon the " Lyons 
conglomerate," underlies the bulk of the so-called Carboniferous strata. 
There is now little doubt that this glacial horizon is identical with that of 
Bacchus Marsh, in Victoria, Hallett's Cove, in South Austi'alia, Wynyard, 
in Tasmania, and Lochinvar, and Kempsey in New South Wales. All the 
strata above this g]acial horizon might fairly be termed Permo-Carboniferous 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 269 

at any rate, if not Permian. In the Kimberley District of Western Aus- 
tralia, the glacial horizon has not been identified definitely, and perhaps 
does not exist there, but the fossils are essentially similar to those above the 
glacial horizon of the Lyons conglomerate, and may therefore provisionally 
be classed as Permo-Carboniferous and even Permian. 

While therefore considering that there is much to justify the term 
" Permian " being substituted for that of " Permo-Carboniferous," the writer 
proposes to retain temporarily for the purposes of this article the old term 
" Permo-Carboniferous," chiefly because it has been so widely used, and 
generally accepted. 

As regards geographical distribution, rocks of this system are very widely 
spread throughout the Commonwealth. In Tasmania about one-half of 
the island, which is rather bigger than Ceylon but smaller than Ireland, is 
covered with rocks of this age. They commence with an important series of 
glacial beds, having a total thickness of about 800 feet. Splendid sections 
of this can be seen between tide marks on the beach to the east of Wynyard. 
Several striated pavements occur in the tillite, which show that the ice moved 
from about S.S.W. to N.N.E. An interesting fact which has lately come to 
light is that there are at least three, perhaps four distinct tillite horizons, 
and these are separated from one another by strata perhaps representing 
inter-glacial epochs. Each tillite horizon can be correlated certainly with 
those of Victoria, and almost certainly with those of South Africa, and these 
are succeeded by marine strata belonging to the Lower Marine series, over 
600 feet thick at this locality. This series is followed by one of the most 
important coal-bearing horizons in Australia, viz., the Greta series. In 
Tasmania, however, the series is represented by only a few seams of coal, 
from 20 inches up to 3| feet in thickness. In places this coal passes into 
kerosene shale, formed largely of the problematical plant considered to be 
an alga, Reinschia australis. Above the Greta series is a considerable de- 
velopment in Tasmania of rocks of the Upper Marine series. In Tasmania 
the great series of freshwater coal measures developed in New South Wales 
and Queensland above the Upper Marine series are wanting, and in Tasmaina 
rocks of Trias-Jura or Jurassic age rest conformably on the topmost Marine 
beds of the Permo-Carboniferous system. 

In Victoria there is a wonderful development of glacial beds of the nature 
of tillites associated with contemporaneous conglomerates and ripple-marked 
sandstones, together with fine clay shales. The whole series passes upwards 
into sandstones containing Gaiigamopteris, and is over 2,000 feet in thickness. 
Hitherto no marine strata nor coal seams have been discovered in Victoria 
in this system. These glacial beds lie on a surface of low relief, though in 
places, as at the Werribee Gorge, the tillite fills an old U-shaped valley, 
perhaps an overdeepened valley. The rocks on which the tillite 
rests, mostly of Ordovician age, with Post Ordovician granites are very 
strongly striated and grooved by ice coming from a southerly direction. 
The sandstone beds between the tillites show strong evidence in places of 
contemporaneous contortion. As the matrix of the tillite varies with that 
of the subjacent rock, there can be no doubt that the tillite was formed by 
an immen.se sheet of land ice, the main mass of which lay to the south. These 
glacial deposits can be traced at intervals across Victoria, northwards by 



270 Federal Handbook. 



way of Heathcote to Beechworth, close to the southern border of New South 
Wales, aud fiue striated pavements can be seen at Derrinal, near Heathcote, 
together with erratics up to 30 tons in weight. Westwards they extend 
under the level plains of Tertiary rock, having been proved to underlie Nhill. 
To the south of Adelaide, between that city and the mouth of the Murray 
River, there are magnificent clifi sections showing the junction of these old 
glacial beds with the Lower Cambrian strata. Beautiful striated pavements 
are to be seen in the Inman Valley, Hallett's Cove, etc., which prove that 
the ice came from a south by east direction. The glacial beds are there, 
with their associated conglomerates, sandstones, and shales, fully 900 feet 
in thickness, but so far in South Australia, as in Victoria, no productive coal 
of this age nor marine fossils have as yet been found. In fact there are 
considerable patches there of Permo-Carboniferous glacial landscape re- 
discovered by modern denudation. Still further west, in the south-west 
corner of Western Australia, there is a small basin, preserved in a deep trough 
fault, known as the Collie coal-field. This coal-field contains the fossil plant 
Ga7igamopteris, associated with numerous seams of coal up to over 10 feet in 
thickness, but the strata are so very porous, that when shafts, bores or tunnels 
are made in these measures they become veritable artesian wells. The 
coal itself, contrary to usual experience in strata of this age, is distinctly 
hydrous. Northwards from Perth the Irwin River region has preserved 
a small patch of glacial beds immediately underlying richly fossiliferous 
marine strata including limestones, and conformably overlying brown clay 
shales. Two seams of coal conformably overlie the marine strata, the main 
seam 5 feet thick and though not so proved by fossils, presumably of Permo- 
Carboniferous age. Still further north in Western Australia, the glacial 
conglomerate has been ti-aced from near the Carnarvon bore at the mouth of 
the Gascoyne River to the Wooramel River, and almost up to the latitude 
of North-west Cape. Thus in Western Australia these Permo-Carboniferous 
glacial beds actually touch the region of the tropics. As evidenced by the 
nature of the contained boulders, when compared with their nearest parent 
rocks, it is clear that the ice sheets, which produced this glaciation, moved, 
on the whole, from the inland plateau westwards or northwards, probably in 
a north-westerly direction, inasmuch as the glacial boulders become pro- 
gressively larger the fm'ther south they are traced. These glacial beds are 
known as the " Lyons conglomerate." So far no striated floor has been dis- 
covered beneath them. In the Kimberley district of Western Australia 
there is a considerable development of marine Permo-Carboniferous calcareous 
sandstones and limestones, and it has been proved that these Carboniferous 
strata from the Gascoyne River to the Kamberley District contain invaluable 
supplies of artesian water, though strange to say they are quite wanting in 
productive coal seams as far as they have yet been tested. Strata of 
this age extend further east around the Australian coast to the Victoria 
River. The marine strata at the Victoria River are associated with fresh- 
water shales containing Glossopteris. This Glossoptris underlies strata which 
contains Orthotetes and Aulosteges. This formation has been traced across 
into Arnhem Land (to the north-east of Darwin), and to the islands of the 
north-east extremity of Arnhem Land. Groote Island is thought to belong 
to this system. A remarkable feature is that from the Gulf of Carpentaria 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 271 

around to the Irwin Eiver region the whole assemblage of marine Permo- 

Carboniferous fossils is distinctly of Indian type. S.S.E. of Cape York is 
a deep indent in the coast line, marking a prolongation of the trough valley 
in which lies the Permo-Carbonifeious coal-field of the Little Kiver. As 
the result of heavy downthrows, the strata have been forced into rather sharp 
zigzag folds, a rare structure in rocks of this age in Australia. Near Towns- 
ville is a small development of Permo-Carboniferous strata, which there 
underlie the coastal plain, and extend out to sea beneath the coral reefs of 
the Great Barrier. Next we reach the classical coal-field of the Bowen River. 
There evidence of glacial action, in the foim probably of floating ice, is to be 
found in the shape of numerous small boulders of granite and other rocks 
foreign to the district embedded in the clay shales of the Permo-Carboniferous 
system, but nothing approaching a true tillite has ever been observed in 
this area. Next, on the south, come the extensive and thick coal seams of 
the Dawson River basin. The thickest seam known in Australia in rocks 
of this system occurs near Comet, where it is 80 feet thick. Anthracite of 
excellent quality occurs in a seam 11 feet thick oa the Dawson River, about 
30 miles south of Duaringa, but unfortimately the coal-field in that area 
is much broken up by faults. The Permo-Carboniferous system in this im- 
portant coal-field can be divided up into the following groups arranged in 
ascending order : — 

('At the base, marine beds such as those of Gympie, 

with boulders presumably transported by ice. 
Next, Lower Marine strata followed by a volcanic 

series. 
Lower Bowen<| Above this follow sedimentary rocks, with the 11-ft. 

seam of anthracite already described. 
This is followed by the marine shell beds of Oakey 

Creek and St. Marys, in turn capped by the Glossop- 

teris beds of Oakey Creek and St. Marys. 
All these strata are grouped together as Lower Bowen. There follows a 
slight unconformity and above it are developed the marine shell beds of 
Claremont and Capella. Above these again, and slightly imconformable 
to them, are the Tolmie's coal measures. The latter are capped by the old 
auriferous conglomerates of Claremont. The whole of this last series is grouped 
together as Upper Bowen. No estimate has, as yet, been formed of the 
available quantity of Permo-Carboniferous coal in Queensland, but it must 
be very vast, perhaps, approximating to the 100,000,000,000 of tons roughly 
estimated to be present in the form of exploitable coal in New South Wales. 
South-east of the Dawson field the Permo-Carboniferous strata are repre- 
sented by the basal marine beds of the Gympie gold-field. It has been the 
experience there that wherever the quartz reefs, which traverse these strata, 
come in contact with the occasionally intercalated beds of black carbonaceous 
shale, they are payably gold-bearing. The Dawson coal-field, traced in a 
southerly direction, reaches the borders of New South Wales, near Bonshaw 
and Ashford. At the latter locality a fine seam of anthracite coal, 27 feet in 
thickness, is to be seen in tlie left bank of the Severn River. As Gangamop- 
teris is the only fossil known to occur in association with this seam, it may 
provisionally be considered to be of Greta age. This field occupies a narrow 



272 Federal Handbook. 



fault trougli. About 100 miles east of this spot at Undercliff, there are beds 
of graphite associated with intrusive acid granites. These graphite beds 
are considered to represent intensely metamorphosed coal seams of Permo- 
Carboniferous age. These graphitic strata are to be connected with marine 
beds of undoubted Permo-Carboniferous origin as at the gold-field of Drake, 
where contemporaneous acid and basic lavas are inter-stratified with the 
lower beds. 

South from Ashford, the region of Gunnedah is reached, from which the 
principal coal-field of New South Wales extends without a break for fully 
300 miles, as far south as the head of the Clyde River, near Ulladulla. The 
type district in this field is that of Maitland, in the Hunter Valley. The 
system is there ushered in, at Lochinvar, by reddish-brown clays with numerous 
glacial boulders, but hardly deserving of the name of a true tillite. These 
beds are about 300 feet in thickness. They are followed by nearly 4,800 
feet of strata, mostly of marine origin, with an exceptionally rich Permo- 
Carboniferous fauna. The fossil Eurydesma cordata is especially charac- 
teristic of these Lower Marine rocks. Its frequent association with coarse 
conglomerates shows that it was littoral in habit. The fine state of preserva- 
tion of the marine shells at the classic spot — Harper's Hill — is due to the fact 
that they were suddenly overwiielmed in showers of contemporaneous vol- 
canic ash, which has eSectually preserved them to the present day. Large 
Aviculopectens and vast numbers of polyzoa, belonging to the family of the 
Fenestellidae also abound, and may possibly have some relation to cold water 
conditions, just as at the present time one sees the icy seas of the Antarctic 
swarming in polyzoa and pectens. The Greta coal measures, from 100 to 
300 feet thick, which conformably overlie the Lower Marine series, are not 
relatively rich in fossil plants. It is significant that in these measures Gan- 
(/amopteris predominates over Glossopteris, whereas in the higher coal mea- 
sures of this system the reverse is the case. It should here be mentioned 
that the Gangamopteris has been found as low down as 2,000 feet below the 
Greta coal measures in the middle of the Lower Marine series. The Greta 
coal measures usually contain about 20 feet of workable coal, and, excep- 
tionally as much as 40 feet. The Upper Marine strata, which follow the 
Greta, attain their maximum thickness yet proved in the Hunter River 
region, viz., 5,000 to 6,400 feet. About half-way up in the series erratics, 
certainly of glacial origin, are very numerous in places, occurring usually 
in groups. Many of these blocks of rock are one to two tons in weight, and 
appear to have been derived from the region of Mount Lambie, near Rydal 
or Bathurst, about 200 miles to the south-west. It is significant, probably, 
of glacial conditions, that we find an almost total absence of reef-forming 
corals m the Permo-Carboniferous strata. Such corals as do occur are slender 
types like Zaphrentis and Trachypora. Near the top of the Upper Marine 
series, as well as on certain horizons lower down, are remarkably large pseudo- 
morphs known as glendonite. These crystals attain a length of from 2 ins. 
to 1 foot. They are best seen on the beach between tide marks at Huskisson, 
Jervis Bay, about 100 miles southerly from Sydney. The shore here presents 
the appearance of a medieval battlefield, strewn with spear heads and caltrops. 
They are pseudomorphs after the double sulphate of sodium and calcium, 
glauberite. As deposits of sodium sulphate are very common and 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 273 

characteristic in Antarctica, these glendonites may have some climatological 
significance. They have also been found in Tasmania, close to the horizon of 
the oil shale known as Tasmanite, in part of the Mersey coal-basin. Above 
the Upper Marine follow the strata of the Middle Coal measures, known as 
the East Maitland or Tomago measures. These are from 500 to 1,800 feet 
thick and contain in the aggregate about 40 feet of coal, which, being more 
friable than that of the Greta, is not so suitable for export, though 
useful for household, gas, and blacksmith purposes. A total thickness of 
about 18 feet of coal is worked. In parts of the Hunter River coal-field, 
there follows a considerable thickness, in places about 2,000 feet thick, of 
fresh water strata, with abundant plant remains, but devoid of any coal 
seams of workable thickness. These beds belong to the Dempsey series. 
Next, above the Dempsey, comes the Newcastle series, 12,000 to 14,000 feet 
in thickness, with about 120 feet of coal. The thickness of the seams varies 
from 1 foot up to about 27 feet. The aggregate thickness of workable coal 
in this series is from 35 to 40 feet. On the shores of Lake Macquarie, at 
Awaba, as well as at the southern entrance to Lake Macquarie, known as 
Reid's Mistake, are fossil forests of coniferous trees. At the latter locality 
it can be seen that the trees sprang directly from the upper portion of a 
coal seam being actually in position of growth. The lower parts of the stem 
are of carbon, but upwards they pass into chalcedony, where they have 
been buried under showers of very fine volcanic tuff. The tuff has evidently 
broken down branches of the trees, and resin has exuded from the fractures, 
and is preserved now in the form of black drops in the tuff, the latter being 
converted into chert. Some of these coniferous trees can be seen to 
be over 100 feet in length. 

It may be said that, on the whole, the evidence points to the coal seams 
in the whole of the Permo-Carboiiiferous system, having formed, for the most 
part, at the spot where seams are now found. For example, in the under clay, 
only thin rootlets have been observed. In the clay bands higher up, in the 
seam numerous specimens of Vertebraria can be frequently seen in position 
of growth. It is only in the actual roofs of the seams that forest trees like 
the conifer Dadoxylon have been proved to exist. In places, but rarely, 
remains of fossil fish, and of labyrinthodonts have been discovered in the 
coal measures, from those of Greta age up to those of Newcastle age. For 
example, a small labryrinthodont has been recorded from the Mersey coal 
measures (Greta horizon) near Railton, and another was found in the kero- 
sene shale at Airlie, in the western coal-field of New South Wales. Palaeoniscus 
has been obtained from the marine (probably lower marine) Permo-car- 
boniferous rocks of Tasmania, and Urosthenes from the Newcastle coal 
measures of New South Wales. The total amount of exploitable coal in 
seams not less than 3 feet thick and not more than 4,000 feet in depth in tliese 
measures in New South Wales, is estimated to be roiiglily about 100,000,000,000 
tons. 

Summary — (1) Ju regard to Palfeogeography the ice which glaciated 
Tasmania, Victoria and South Austi'alia, came from the south fronx a land 
probably a local extension southwards into the Southern Ocean, of the Aus- 
tralian continent. The glaciation of Cambrian time, in Australia, came 
from the same quarter. In Western Australia, the glaciation is thought to 



274 Federal Handbook. 



have come from tte south-east, from local highlands, near the southern end 
of Western Australia. In Eastern Australia, the region afiected by the 
glaciation was a landscape apparently of low relief, but we know nothing 
of the height of the gathering ground of the ice sheets on the now sunken 
part of the continent, where the eastern end of Jefirey's Deep shows a depth 
of 3,000 fathoms. Possibly the great bank recently discovered which lies 
about 200 miles south of Tasmania, and which rises from great ocean depths 
to within 500 to 600 fathoms of the surface formed part of a high south- 
eastern margin to Australia, extending from this bank to Kangaroo Island 
in Permo-Carboniferous time. This was no doubt in part a gathering ground 
for the inland ice. In New South Wales, there seem to have been local 
alpine glaciers. In south-western Western Australia, there seems to have 
been a local ice sheet. 

(2) There were at least three interglacial phases in Australia, probably 
to be correlated with those of Africa. (3) The fauna especially in disappear- 
ance of Carboniferous reef-forming corals suggests general refrigeration of 
the seas, while the flora of the coal seams is not inconsistent with that of a 
climate like that of Macquarie Island. (4) Snow line touched sea level 
probably near 40 degrees S. latitude in Permo-Carboniferous time, and glaciers 
came down to sea level at about 34 degrees S. latitude. (5) This may demand 
a fall of temperature as compared ■^'ith the present of about 10 degrees C. 

(i) Trias System. 

Rocks of this age are at present known to be developed chiefly in the 
Sydney and Blue Mountain areas of New South Wales. In Tasmania, 
however, the Knocklofty Series, variegated sandstones, 1,000 feet tliiok, 
which, in the neighbourhood of Hobart, overlie the Penno-Carboniferous 
strata, have been doubtfully referred to some part of Triassic time. They 
contain remains of Acrolepis hamiltoni and A. tasmanicus, and bones of, 
probably, a labyrinthodont. The occurrence in the sandstones of Vertebraria 
indica, Royle, siiggests affinities with the Permo-Carboniferous system. 
The Ida Bay Series containing Zeugophyllites and Pecopteris lunensis are 
perhaps Triassic. In regard to the Fingal Series in the Tasmanian coal- 
measures, as some doubt exists as to whether they belong to the top of the 
Trias, or to the base of the Jurassic, they wiU be described later. 

The Triassic strata of New South Wales extend along the coast from 
the Cambewarra Ranges in the south to Lake Macquarie, near Newcastle, 
in the north, thence they stretch inland to beyond Gunnedah, on the north- 
west, and westwards to a little beyond Lithgow. 

The rocks in this area have been divided, chiefly lithologically, into three 
stages which, in descending order, are as follows : — 

Wiannamatta shales. — Thickness about 600 feet. 
Hawkesbury sandstone. — Thickness about 300 to 1,000 feet. 
Narrabeen beds.— Thickness about 200 to 2,000 feet. 

The strata of the Narrabeen Stage are largely tufaceous, but the true 
tuffs do not constitute more than about one-tenth part of the whole thickness of 
the Stage. In their lower portion they are mostly grey to greenish-grey sand* 
stones, with greenish conglomerates and grey-green and reddish to chocolate- 
coloured shales. Five hundred feet above the Bulli coal seam (the top of 



GrEOLOGY OP THE COMMONWEALTH. 275 

the Permo-Carboniferous System), tufaceous red shales and green tufis 
contain innumerable small scales of metallic copper, together with 
microscopic veins of the same metal. These strata are known as the 
Cupriferous Tuffs. Over 1,000 feet above these tuffs is a second series of 
green tu£Es and chocolate-red shales. In the latter, at Long Reef, 12 miles 
north-east of Sydney, beautiful examples occixr of plants resembling 
Phyllotheca, with their stems of brittle bituminous coal, held together in 
a delicate filigree-like network of metallic copper. Where the strata 
have been much weathered, the metallic copper passes into green and 
blue carbonates. The copper has obviously been derived from the decom- 
position of the basic tufis. The tuffs are traversed in places by small 
veins of barytas. 

The Hawkesbury sandstone, which is typically developed at Sydney and 
in the Blue Mountains, is chiefly formed of white to yellowish-grey sandstones, 
very regularly and evenly bedded, diagonal bedding being very conspicious. 
South of the Hawkesbury River, in the area where this diagonal bedding 
dips to the north-east, primary graphite is scattered in scales or small pellets 
through the sandstone. To the north of the Hawkesbury River, the diagonal 
bedding dips in almost the opposite direction, that is from off the New 
England tableland, and this part of the formation does not contain graphite. 
Small garnets are not infrequent in the southern type of the Hawkesbury 
sandstone. Certain beds in this Stage form a valuable building stone, largely 
worked in Sydney and suburbs. It weathers, as the result of chemical changes 
in the iron carbonates, to a pleasing tint of warm sepia. A few bands of 
dark clay shale are interstiatified with the sandstone. These often show 
evidence of having been disrupted contemporaneously, the fragments being 
up-ended so that their lamination planes are now vertical. Meanwhile, neither 
the sandstones above nor those below show any sign of disturbance. This 
phenomenon, together with that of contemporaneously contorted current- 
bedding, has been ascribed to the action of ice ; but other explanations, 
such as that of undercutting of the clay shales by stream action are possible. 
These sandstones weather into picturesque shelter caves, as the result of 
the removal by capillarity of soluble mineral cement from the inner portion 
of the sandstone and its transference to the exterior. The Wiannamatta 
Stage is mostly formed of black carbonaceous shales, with at least one seam 
of coal, which, with clay bands, is about 4 feet thick. At the top of this 
stage the beds become sandy and calcareous, ending in a calcareous tufaceous 
rock, 100 feet thick, containing a very interesting foraraini feral and 
ostracodan fauna. 

As regards fossil plants, Thinnfeldia odontopteroides is specially charac- 
teristic and abundant throughout the whole series. Macrotreni'pleris and 
Phyllotheca are also typical. Sphenopteris is also common, and in places is 
associated with Alethopleris (Cladophehis), but this last genus is much more 
characteristic, in Australia, of the Jurassic rocks than of the Triassic. Near 
the base of the Narrabeen Stage beautifully preserved specimens of Schizo- 
neura are fairly common, and the genus not only extends downwards into 
the strata which form the roof over the Bulli coal seam, at the top of the 
' Permo-Carboniferous System, but, at the Sydney Harbor collieries shaft 
at Balmain, Sydney, it has been found associated, in the same bed of clay 



276 Federal Handbook. 



shalfe, with Glossopteris. Schizoneura has never been found in either the 
Hawkesbury or in the Wiannamatta Stages, but it occurs in Victoria in 
strata conformably overhang the Gangamopteris sandstones and glacial 
beds at Bacchus Marsh, to the west of Melbourne. 

Stems of trees are numerous in the tuS beds near the top of the Stage, as 
well as forms allied to Baiera. Fossil fruit are plentiful in these beds at Long 
Reef and Narrabeen, to the north of Sydney. Reference has already been 
made to the abundance of Phyllotheca, some stems of which are partly encrusted 
with metallic copper. The lower part of the Narrabeen Stage, for about 
500 feet above the top of the Permo-Carboniferous System, is swarming in 
small black valves of several species of Estheria. Just at the top of the 
Xarrabeen Stage, or possibly a few feet up into the Hawkesbury Sandstone 
Stage, is a bed of shale at Gosford, which has proved exceptionally rich 
in remains of fossil fish, together with remains of small labyi'inthodonts. The 
principal forms found are PalcBoniscus, Myriolepis, Cleithrolepis, Apateolepis, 
Dictyopyge, Belonorhynchus, Semionotus, Pristisomus, Pholidophorus, etc. 

In the Hawkesbury Sandstone Stage a problematical fossil plant, Ottdia 
prcBterita, occurs sparingly. In the occasional intercalated shale beds 
Oleandridium has been recorded, while Thinnfeldia odontopteroides is very 
abundant. The leaves are so well preserved that they are sufficiently coherent 
and flexible to be lifted off the surface of the shale, and when subsequently 
examined under the microscope, are seen to have preserved much original 
structure. 

At Biloela (Cockatoo Island), near Sydney, a thoracic plate of Masto- 
donsaurus was found, and also, strange to say, at the same spot, a specimen 
of Tremanotus. This Silurian genus on a Triassic horizon may represent 
either a remarkable survival, or it is possible that the fossil may be an erratic 
in this formation. It is preserved in ironstone, which may have replaced 
a small fragment of limestone. In the shales of the Wiannamatta series, most 
of the fossils are either at the base or near the top of the Stage. Just as the 
Hawkesbmy sandstone usually rests on an eroded surface of Narrabeen 
beds, so in the case of the junction line of the Wiannamatta shales, with the 
Hawkesbury sandstone there is in many cases evidence of contemporaneous 
erosion. A good deal of concretionary clay ironstone has formed in the 
basal beds of the Wiannamatta shales, and these are mostly fossiliferous. 
In addition to Thinnfeldia and Phyllotheca, the Cycadopteris scolopendrica has 
been recorded from these beds. True cycads appear on the whole to be 
wanting throughout the whole of the Australian Triassic rocks. 

In the ironstone concretions referred to above, shells of Mollusca are often 
very abundant, belonging to the genera Unio and Unioiiella. The dwarf 
character of these shells suggests that the strata containing them were 
deposited in brackish water. In the brick-pits of Newtown and Enmore, 
in Sydney, numerous well-preserved specimens of fossil fish have been 
obtained. These range in size from a few inches up to specimens 6 feet in 
length. 

Labyrinthodont remains have been found on this horizon, both at Enmore 
and at the Gib Rock Tunnel, near Bowi-al. 

The specimen discovered at the former locality measures about 10 feet 
in length. Its immense jaws ai*e furnished with three rows of powerful 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 277 

conical teeth. The original specimen, preserved in clay ironstone, has 
never yet been described. It is now at Brisbane, in the possession of the 
Government Geologist of Queensland, who also has several as yet undescribed 
fossil insects, discovered by him in these shales. The Wiannamatta Stage 
closes with a bed of greenish tufaceous and calcareous sandstone, passing 
into sandy limestone. This is largely formed of foramipiferal and ostracodan 
shells. Comment has been made on the fact that, in this horizon of the 
Wiannamatta Stage, we have a remarkable example of the survival of a 
Silurian type of ostracod in the genus Beyrichia endothyra ; also on this 
horizon is an interesting survivor from the carboniferous fauna. On the 
other hand, the genus Haplophragmium, which also occurs on this horizon, 
is not known elsewhere to descend so low stratigraphically. 

The geographical conditions under which the strata of the Hawkesbury 
series were accumulated appear to be those of a large shallow lake close to 
the sea, with which possibly there was intermittent communication. The 
Gangamopteris-Glossopteris Flora of the Permo-Carboniferous Ice Age had, 
with the exception of Phyllotheca, Sphenopteris, and perhaps Alethopteris, 
completely disappeared before the earliest strata were deposited in this 
great lake basin. The eruptions, perhaps of the Kiama-Cambewarra region, 
or at all events of that zone, were prolonged into Triassic time, as proved 
by the frequent beds of basic tuff in the Nairabeen Stage. The evidence 
of ripple-marks and suncracks on many horizons all through the series points 
obviously to shallow water conditions. The foraminiferal ostracodan sandy 
limestone and calcareous sandstone at the top of the whole series prove 
that after a subsidence near the centre of the basin of about 3,500 feet, marine, 
or at least estuarine, conditions supervened. The flora of these Triassic 
rocks differs from the Jurassic in the presence in the former of Phyllotheca in 
vast numbers and of Oleandridium, while the Toeniopteris daintreei and varieties 
of cycads so common in the Australian Jurassic rocks are wanting in the 
Trias. Triassic types of Estheria do not ascend into the Jurassic, neither 
do the labyrinthodonts. 

Endothyra, Beyrichia, Trenianotus {^), and Palceoniscus all represent 
Palaeozoic forms of life surviving into Mesozoic time in the Trias of Australia. 

In reference to the Fingal Series, and other representatives of the upper 
coal measures of Tasmania, some doubt exists as to whether they are to be 
classed as Upper Trias, perhaps Rhaetic, or Lower Jurassic. As Tcenio- 
pteris daintreei {T. spathulata) regarded as a critical form in Australia for 
differentiating the Jurassic from the Trias has never yet been found in 
Tasmania, and the genus Phyllotheca is of common occurrence in these 
Tasmanian coal measures, it is proposed to class them provisionally as 
Upper Trias, or Passage Beds into the Jurassic propei'. Thinnfeldia odon- 
topteroides, Alethopteris {Cladophehis denticulata) australis, Tceniopteris 
tasnianica, T. tnorrisiana, Phyllotheca, and Zeugoj)hyllites {Phoenicopsis, or 
Podozamites) elongatus are most charactei-istic. Other forms present are 
Ptilophyllum oligoneurum, Sphenopteris lobi folia, Pterophyllum, Baiera 
tenuifolia, Ginkgophyllum australe, etc. It may be stated generally that these 
Fingal coal measures are not as rich in fossil cycadaceous forms as are the 
true Jurassic rocks of the mainland. These measures, about 1,200 feet in 
thickness, are formed chiefly of yellow, brown, greenish, and bluish- grey 



278 Federal Handbook. 



sandstones, with coal seams from 4 feet up to 20 feet in thickness. The coal 
is of fair quality, containing from 1 per cent, up to 4 per cent, of moisture, 
and from 9 per cent, up to 15 per cent, of ash. 

(j) Jurassic System. 

Rocks referable to this period belong to what was probably the greatest 
lake epoch through which the Australasian continent has passed. The 
principal lake extended from some point south of Dubbo to at least as far 
north as the far extremity of the Bunya Bunya Ranges of Queensland to the 
north-west of Dalby. It is probable that the lake extended still further up 
to the Cloncurry area. Westwards they stretch more or less continuously to 
Lake Eyre, and still further westwards to Lake Phillipson. The lake would 
thus have had a total length of 1,200 miles from east to west, with a width 
from north to south of 700 to 800 miles. 

The strata deposited in this lake, or chain of lakes, are the main source 
of supply of the artesian water in the great artesian basin. 

They vary in thickness from 300 to 400 feet up to, at Lake Phillipson, 
about 3,000 feet. Eastwards the basin extends through a narrow neck near 
Brisbane {vide Plate IIL) to the coast at the mouth of the Brisbane River, 
and also by a wider passage to the east coast, along the basin of the Clarence 
River, between Ballina and Woolgoolga. That there is no outlet of conse- 
quence, if any, for the artesian basin in this direction is proved by the fact 
that a bore has been put down to a depth of over 3,000 feet at Grafton, and 
only a feeble trickle of artesian water has been tapped. The same remark 
applies to the bore at the race-course at Brisbane. As details of this artesian 
basin are given by Mr. E. F. Pittman in his chapter in this volume, only 
very brief references will be made to the subject here. The section (Plate 
VI.) shows somewhat arbitrarily the line of junction between the Jurassic 
and the Cretaceous rocks, and is to be regarded as provisional only, as, on 
account of most of the bores being carried out by percussion, the fossils in the 
strata passed through are usually in such a fragmental state that identifica- 
tion is often very difficult. 

The section (Plate VII.) shows the hydraulic grade descending from 
Charleville as a centre northwards to the Gulf of Carpentaria, and 
south-westwards to Lake Eyre. This fall in the hydraulic grade is 
difficult of explanation. The difficulties are obvious from the section, 
which shows that at its south-western end the basin is apparently 
blocked by impervious Pre-Cambrian or older Palaeozoic rocks, so that 
apparently it has no outlet in that direction. Then, too, towards the 
north, a sill of older rock rises so high above the general floor of the basin 
that it woiild seem to go far towards checking any important underflow 
and outflow to the sea in this direction also. The explanation of the fall 
of the hydraulic grade seawards from Charleville, in Queensland, would 
seem to be eithor (a) that there are narrow subterranean outlets (which have 
not yet been tapped in the bores), both in the direction of the Bight and in 
that of the Gulf of Carpentaria ; or {b) that before the bores were sunk the chief 
outlet for the artesian water was through those natural artesian wells — the 
Mound Springs. These are very numerous on the Lower Flinders River in 
the north, and near Lake Eyre towards the south-west end of the basin. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 



279 




280 



Federal Handbook. 




Geology of the Commonwealth. 281 

That springs connected with faults supply part of the artesian water is 
obvious ; but it is probable that by far the larger proportion has a 
meteoric origin, being derived from rain falling direct on to the outcrop 
of the porous beds, or leaking into them from the channels of rivers. 

This supposition receives some confirmation from the Cainozoic analogue 
of the artesian basin at Perth, in Western Australia, where the inter- 
dependence between rainfall and the outflow of artesian water has been 
distinctly proved ; but the conditions in the Perth artesian basin are not 
in every respect analogous to those in the central Jurassic basin. For example, 
in the latter the factor of gas pressure is very important in helping to force 
the artesian supply to the surface. Over 90 per cent, of the gas concerned 
in producing this pressure is nitrogen ; gases like CH4, CO2, HgS, etc., are 
present in far smaller proportion. This nitrogen is almost certainly not of 
plutonic origin, but is probably derived from the alteration of organic 
material, such as lignite or coal, by the action of anaerobic bacteria. As, 
however, the temperature of the artesian water is in some cases up to 204 
degrees Fahr., even when the water arrives at the surface, it is difficult to 
understand how bacteria can live under such conditions. But, so far, the 
waters from the chief bores which evolve nitrogen have much lower tem- 
peratures than the above. This interesting problem, as indeed that of 
the whole physics, chemistry, and geology of the great artesian basin, still 
awaits solution. The total depth of all the artesian bores of Australia, 
according to the latest figures available to the writer, is almost exactly 
500 miles, and the potential daily yield about 680 millions of gallons. 

Strata of Jurassic age are also found on the eastern periphery of Australia 
and in Tasmania, as well as in the coastal regions of Western Australia. 

In Queensland the principal localties are Ipswich, Clifton, Callide Creek 
west of Gladstone, Stanwell, and Rosewood west of Rockhampton, and 
Broadsound to its north. The strata are there from 2,000 to at least 3,000 
feet in thickness, and consist of sandstones, conglomerates, and shales, 
with massive beds of quartz-trachHe tuff at the base of the Series at Brisbane. 
Basic lavas are present on a higher horizon and contemporaneous trachyte 
lavas. These are found between Brisbane and the Macpherson Ranges, 
on the borders of New South Wales and Queensland. The seams of coal 
in the Queensland Jurassic rocks range from a few feet up to a maximum 
of 30 feet in thickness. In the Ipswich basin the seams vary from about 
6 feet up to 8 or 10 feet in thickness. The principal fossils are Twniopteris 
daintreei, Thinnfeldia odontopteroides, Alethopteris australis, Sagenopteris, 
Ptilophyllum, Podozamites Jddstoni, Otozamites, Brachyphyllum, etc. The 
fossil fauna comprises Estheria mangaliensis, Unio ipsviciensis, Unio eyrensis, 
while insects are represented by Mesostigmodera typica and several as yet 
undescribed forms. 

In the Clarence Basin of northern New South Wales, strata of this age 
are probably at least 4,000 feet in thickness. They are divided into Upper 
Middle, and Lower Clarence Stages respectively. The Lower Clarence Stage 
contains several seams of coal, up to a maximum thickness of al)out 37 feet, 
but the seams are so full of clay bands that they are not at present worked 
commercially. The Middle Clarence Stage is a strongly marked horizon of 
massive diagonal-bedded sandstone. The Upper Clarence consists of clay, 
C.12154. T 



282 Federal Handbook. 



shales, and clayey sandstones. A rich flora is contained in the Lower Clarence 
Stage, but it has not yet been described. Tceniopteris daintreei and 
Thinnfeldia odontopteroides are the most characteristic fossils. 

A small isolated patch of Jurassic rock also occurs at Talbragan, between 
Mudgee and Dubbo, in New South Wales. These strata, which rest on an 
eroded surface of Hawkesbury sandstone, contain the following fossils : — 
Tceniopteris daintreei, Alethopteris australis, Thinnfeldia falcata, Podoza- 
mites lanceolatus, and Baiera hidens. Insects were represented by an ancestor 
of the true locust, the fossil form being described as Cicada lowei. 

Amongst the fish, which are very numerous, are Leptolepis gregarious, 
Archceomene rohustus, Coccolepis, etc. 

In Victoria there are three considerable areas of Jurassic rocks — those of 
South C4ippsland, the Cape Otway District, and the neighbourhood of Merino, 
in the west. 

The strata consist of felspathic sandstones, with abundant fresh frag- 
mental felspar, perhaps of tufaceous origin, besides shales, mudstones, and 
seams of coal. The seams are worked commercially in the Cape Paterson 
District, as at the State-owned colliery at Wonthaggi. The coal is of fairly 
good quality, and the thickness of the seams varies from 2 to 9 feet. The 
following are among the most characteristic fossils : — Coniopteris hyineno- 
phylloides var. australica, Cladophlehis denticulata var. australis, Sphenopteris 
ampla, Thitinfeldia odontopteroides, T. maccoyi, Tceniopteris spatidata and 
vars. daintreei and carruthersi, Podozamites harklyi, Ginkgo robusta, Baiera 
subgracilis, Palissya australis, Brachyphyllwn gippslandicum, TJnio stirlingi. 
The interesting discovery has been made of a tooth of Ceratodus from Cape 
Paterson, C. avus. Scales of Ceratodus have also been described from the 
parLsh of Killak, South Gippsland. Ceratodus has of course been recorded 
from the Stormberg series of South Africa, as well as from the Trias of Eui-ope. 
Another recent very interesting discovery has been that of a claw of a dinosaur 
also in the Cape Paterson beds. 

In South Australia, to the south of Lake E}Te, there is a small Jurassic 
coal basin, an outlier of the main Jurassic artesian basin, and preserved in 
a deep trough fault. This is the Leigh's Creek coal basin. Its strata of sand- 
stone and carbonaceous shales are over 2,000 feet in thickness, and comprise 
several seams of coal, one of which is 47 feet in thickness. This coal is a 
hydrous brown coal. The chief fossils are Thinnfeldia odontopteroides, 
T. media, Macrotceinopteris wianamaUce, Podozamites lanceolatus, and an 
immense number of the fossil pelecypod Unio eyrensis. This occiu-red in 
almost every foot of the core from the bore for coal, from <-he surface to a 
depth of over 1,500 feet. The only marine equivalents of strata of Jurassic 
age mthin the Commonwealth are found on the wes^ and south-west coasts 
of Western Australia. They are chiefly developed in the Northampton 
District, extending thence by way of the Greenough Eiver to Gingm, about 
40 miles north of Perth, in Western Australia. The strata consist of white 
sandstones, ferruginous sandstones, light-coloured claystones, grits, lime- 
stones, and shales, with lignites. Their maximum thickness is quite 3,000 
feet. In places phosphatic green-coloured patches in the ferruginous sand- 
stone contain the phosphatic mineral dufrenite. .irtesian water has been 
struck in this formation at Dongara and at Yardarino ; but after flowing for 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 283 

a few years, the flow has ceased at the former looa,lity through the bore 
becoming choked, and at the latter through failure of the supply. The 
following are the most typical fossils in this area : — Otozamites feistmanteli, 
Zigno, Pagiophyllum {?), Pentacrinus australis, Trigonia nioorei, Teredo 
found in its own bores in fossil wood, several varieties of Jurassic ammonites, 
and remains of large enaliosaurians. The second area commences at Cape 
Riche, and extends to beyond the Phillips River. The strata, in almost 
horizontal beds, rise to about 700 feet above sea-level. Perfect specimens 
of fossil sponges are weathered out from some of the caves in this formation. 

A very important unit in the geology of Tasmania is the huge sills of 
diabase (granophyric dolerite and enstatite-augite dolerite), often over 500 
feet thick, which have been intruded into these coal measures. They are 
almost certainly Pre-Cainozoic. If they are of the same age as the great 
dolerite sills of the Karroo System of South Africa, and the Antarctic dolerites, 
which intrude the Beacon sandstone formation of the Ross Sea Region, they 
should probably be placed at the top of the Jurassic, and perhaps be 
connected with the breaking up of Gondwana Land, at the close of Jurassic 
time. 

(k) Cretaceous System. 

This system is divided at present into the Rolling Downs formation 
below, and the Desert Sandstone above. The lower formation is almost 
wholly marine, except in the case of the Burrum coal-field of Queensland 
with the adjacent Frazer Island, or Great Sandy Island, and intermediate 
islands, which consist partly of fresh-water beds. The Desert Sandstone 
is mostly of fresh-water origin ; but in places, as at Croydon, in Queensland, 
it contains in abundance Rhynchonella croydonensis, and at Fanny Bay 
and adjacent areas at Darwin is represented by a radiolarian shale, and by 
cherts containing casts of small Belemnites. As regards thickness, the 
Desert Sandstones vary from about 150 feet up to a maximum of 500 feet, 
while the Rolling Downs beds are known to be in places about 2,000 feet in 
thickness, perhaps more. The exact thickness is not always easy to deter- 
mine, on account of a nearly conformable downward passage from the 
Rolling Downs beds into the Jurassic strata. The vast extent, about one- 
third, of the whole area of Australia, formerly covered by the rocks of the 
Cretaceous system, shows that an enormous transgression of the ocean took 
place at this time, so as to develop a distinct epicontinental sea over the whole 
of the east central portion of Australia. Cretaceous rocks are also known 
to be developed on the north-west side of the Victoria Desert in Western 
Australia, as well as under the Tertiary limestones of the Nullarbor Plains 
fronting the Great Australian Bight, as lately proved in the Madura artesian 
bore. They are also represented by a narrow strip, some thousand feet below 
sea level, at Perth, as shown by the Clermont Bore as well as by a similar 
strip extending along the coast from north of Geraldton towards North-west 
Cape. 

Mr. W. S. Dun, in his palseontological notes in this article, comments on 
the fact that the marine fauna from this west coast belt of Western Australia 
is closely allied to the Pondicherry Cretaceous fauna of India, whereas that of 
the great artesian basin represents a peculiar type locally developed within 
this Australian Mediterranean. Lithologically the JDesert Sandstone rocks 



284 Federal Handbook. 



consist mostly of coarse sandstone, passing in the arid regions into 
quartzite, as well as of very siliceous white shales graduating superficially 
into porcellanite, and in places containing valuable deposits of precious 
opal. The latter are associated with remarkable large forms, known to the 
miners as " pineapples," formed of common opal pseudomorphous after 
glauberite, together with concretions locally known as buns of barytes. 
Near Port Mackay, in Queensland, trachytic tufis are said to be associated 
with the lower beds of the Desert Sandstone. This is the only record of 
contemporaneous volcanic activity in the whole Cretaceous System in Aus- 
tralia. Small seams of coal, too thin to be workable, and numerous silicified 
trees occur in places in this formation. The Rolling Downs strata are mostly 
friable sandstones rich in foraminifera, and rendered green by glauconite. 
In addition, at the Burrum coal-field and at Maryborough and Frazer Island, 
sandstones and shales, with fossil plants and seams of productive coal, are 
now considered to be of Cretaceous age. The whole series is approximately 
3,000 feet thick. The Burrum coal seams, of which about four are of workable 
thickness — that is,from 3 feet to 4 feet thick — contain coal of a brittle, bright, 
black, bituminous character, and remarkably free from ash, but too friable 
for export. The fossil plants recently recorded from this Cretaceous coal-field 
show that forms like Trichomanites laxum, Thinnfeldia media, and Tcenio- 
pteris daintreei survived over from Jurassic time. Corbula burrumensis and 
Rocellaria terrce regince are associated with the Burrum coal measures. This 
recent discovery of the survival of part of the Australian Jurassic fauna and 
flora into Cretaceous time is obviously of considerable importance. As regards 
the fossil fauna in the Rolling Downs beds, well preserved remains of 
infusoria belonging to the Tintinnoidm associated mth diatoms and radio- 
laria have been found in fine-grained limestones at Mitchell, on the Maranoa 
River. The following is a list of specially characteristic fossils : — Fora- 
minifera, in which the Lituolidae are strongly represented, Purisiphotiia 
clarkei, Psevdavicula australis, Maccoyella barklyi, Nucula qiiadrata, Cytherea 
clarkei, Belemnites australis, Crioceras australe, Lamna daviesii, Aspido- 
rhynchus sp., BelonostomMs sweeti, Notochelone costata. Ichthyosaurus australis, 
Plesiosaurus macrospondylus, Mschna flindersensis, etc.* 

The general evidence points to a progressive submergence of the Australian 
Continent in Cretaceous time leading to an encroachment of the sea south- 
wards through the direction of the Gulf of Carpentaria across to the Australian 
Bight. It is just possible that there may have been a narrow neck of land 
joining east Australia to Western Australia to the south of Lake Eyre. At 
all events the isolation, when the submergence was at its maximum, of east 
Australia from "Western Australia, must have been nearly complete. The 
wide spread of the comparatively thin beds of the Desert Sandstone, mostly 
of fresh-water origin, indicate that, in Upper Cretaceous time, the Cretaceous 
seas were retiring from the Continental area, and lacustrine conditions were 
taking their place everywhere, except locally, as at Croydon and Darwin. 
It may be added that Melville Island and Bathurst Island, to the north of 
Darwin, are formed of Cretaceous rocks, apparently of Rolling Downs type, 



* This insect is probably an .Eschnidium. Mention may here be made of an extraordinary fosai] 
perhaps allied to .Eschnidium now to be ?een at the Geological and Mining Museum Sydney. It is a 
well preserved wing in the heart of an immense selenite crystal found at over 600 feet underground m 
the Mt. Elliott copper mine, near Cloucurry, Queensland. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 285 



but little is as yet known of their fossil contents. The fact that Lower 
Cretaceous fossils, especially small specimens of Scaphites, are being con- 
stantly washed up on the beach at the Point Charles lighthouse, Darwin, shows 
that Lower Cretaceous rocks underlie the strait which separates Melville 
Island from the mainland. It may be suggested here, very tentatively, 
that the vast transgression of the Cretaceous sea was perhaps causally con- 
nected with two other impoitant geological events, viz.: — Firstly with the 
sinking in of Gondwana land leading to compensating uplifts of the sea 
floor, and secondly with the wholesale injection of the vast dolerite sills, 
which probably further contributed towards shoaling the ocean basins. 

(I) Cainozoic Era. 

The classification and correlation of the rocks of the Commonwealth 
belonging to this era present many difficulties. 

It is harder in Australia than in Northern Europe to separate the Post 
Tertiary from the Tertiary rocks, as whereas in Northern Europe glacial 
deposits, chiefly of Pleistocene time, are widespread, in Australia such glacial 
evidences are wholly restricted to an area of less than 500 square miles, 
which has its centre at Mount Kosciusko. Only in Tasmania can evidences of 
Pleistocene ice action be traced over a large area. Then in regard to the 
correlation of the Australian Tertiaries with those of Europe, the statement 
of an Australian palaeontologist still applies ; — " Many attempts have been 
made to fit the Tertiaries of Southern Australia into the British Procrustean 
subdivisions, and I do not know that the results are any more satisfactory 
to the strata than they were to the guests of Procrustes himself." 

Direct comparison of Australian Tertiary forms with those of Europe 
may prove faUaceous, unless supplemented by other evideoce, for there is 
no direct proof of the existence of any highway for migration of marine 
organisms from the seas of the Southern Hemisphere into the Tethys 
area in early Tertiary time. 

Tested by the Lyellian method — the determination of the percentage of 
recent Mollusca in the series — the Tertiary marine faunas of Australia can be 
compared with the recent fauna of Australian seas, but it is now clear that 
some Australian palaeontologists who worked on these lines did not recognise 
the fact that in many of the older Tertiary deposits of Australia the marine 
moUuscan fauna is not, as was originally supposed, littoral in habit, but belongs 
to a moderate depth ; and recent dredging operations have demonstrated 
the fact that many forms in the older Australian Tertiaries, formerly thought 
to belong to extinct species, are now living at some depths off the Australian 
coasts. If one relies for correlation on the evidence of wide-ranging and 
rapid-moving types, like sharks and whales, it may be noted that GarcJuirodon 
angustidens and C. megalodon, of the older Australian Tertiaries, are charac- 
teristically Miocene in the Northern Hemisphere. Then, too, the toothless 
whales of the Victorian older Tertiaries belong to a group which in the northern 
hemisphere appears to be chiefly Pliocene. 

On the whole the tendency of late has been to refer tlie so-called Eocene 
strata of Southern Australia to some part of Miocene time. Recently it has 
been proposed to divide the Tertiary rocks of Victoria into three systems, 
details of which are given in this article. It will be seen that reliance is 



286 Fedeeal Handbook. 



largely placed for purposes of correlation, on various species of Lepidocyclina. 
Meanwhile the sequence of events in Cainozoic time in Southern Australia 
and Tasmania, from the ciose of Cretaceous time, may be briefly stated 
as follows : — 

1. Accumulation of plant-bearing strata, developing in places into thick 
beds of lignite. These plants have been considered to be Eocene, but may 
be Oligocene or Lower Miocene. A primitive marsupial fauna was probably 
already in occupation of Tasmania, as a nearly complete skeleton of 
Wynyardia has been found in the marine strata of No. 3, which conformably 
tollows No. 2, No. 2 being conformable to No. 1, and all being separated from 
one another by no gi'eat time interval. Wynyardia bassiana was a generalized 
form neither distinctly polyprotodont nor distinctly diprotodont. (The 
original is now in the Hobart Museum.) The older " deep leads " of Eastern 
Australia belong here. 

2. Extensive flows of the so-called " older basalts," and development 
of basic tuffs passing into laterite and covering the elder deep leads. 

3. The Pre-Miocene Bassian landbridge between Tasmania and the main- 
land became broken down, the old bridge becoming involved m a general 
submergence, which afiected the whole of the southern shores of Australia. 
In the Nullarbor Plains area of the Great Australian Bight, strata of white 
chalky limestones, with flints, and often rich in Gryphaea, were developed 
over a large area. Similar strata occur at intervals all along the southern 
shores of Australia. In the Lower Murray area, as well as in Victoria and 
Tasmania, the polyzoon Cellepora gambierensis is extremely characteristic, 
and in the ciifis of the Lower Murray forms sub-spherical masses, each of the 
size of a man's head. These strata attain a thickness of about 80 feet at Table 
Cape, Tasmania, and on the coastal plains of Southern Australia are usually 
200 to 400 feet thick, with a maximum thickness of about 1,000 feet under 
the Nullarbor Plains. The Purari series and the oil-bearing strata of British 
New Guinea probably are of this age. 

4. The Ostrea sturti beds, which overlie the Cellepora limestones of the 
Lower Murray, perhaps Upper Miocene. 

5. The immense belt of alkaline lavas and tuSs, which extend from 
Casterton, in Victoria, through Mount Macedon to Clermont and Springsure, 
in Queensland, perhaps belongs to this horizon. 

Possibly the nepheline-basanite of Table Cape, the melilite basalt 
at Sandy Bay, near Hobart, and the nepheline melilite basalt and 
nepheline eudialyte basalt of Shannon Tier, in Tasmania, were erupted about 
this time. 

6. In British Papua the Port Moresby series probably belongs to the 
older Pliocene. In Australia Marine Pliocene strata, to a thickness of about 
1,000 feet, were deposited in the neighbourhood of Adelaide, as proved by 
the Croydon bore (2,296 feet deep). In all other areas in Australia and 
Tasmania, strata of this age are of freshwater or of volcanic origin. Possibly 
the lake beds of the Launceston Tertiary Basin, 1,000 feet thick, are of 
Pliocene age, as they contain fossil fruits, such as Spondylostrobus 
smythii, Plesiocapparis leptocelyphis, Pentrune allporti, etc., fossils more 
characteristic of the Kalimnan than of either the Janjukian or of the 
Balcombian age. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 287 

7. Vast sheets of basalts, proceeding from dyke eruptions, flooded the 
nearly even surfaces of the east and south-east Australian and Tasmanian 
peneplains. In South Australia they are represented at Kangaroo Island, 
and in Western Australia at Bunbury, the Lower Blackwood River, and at 
Black Point upon the coast. The fact that the flora of this period shows 
scarcely any trace of differentiation suggests that the land had a low relief. 
These extensive basaltic outflows appear to date near to the close of Pliocene 
time. 

8. (a) In either very late Pliocene, or early Pleistocene time, the earth's 
crust, in the Australian and New Guinea region, was subjected to considerable 
diastrophism. The eastern periphery of Australia, including Tasmania, was 
warped up to altitudes of over 3,000 feet above the sea. The movement 
being differential carried an area, sucL as Kosciusko, to a height of 7,000 feet 
above sea level. In New Guinea the Cretaceous to Pliocene strata underwent 
intense orogenic movements, mountains being produced up to and over 
15,000 feet in height. 

(6) A glacial age supervened, which had many phases Kosciusko was 
capped by an ice calotte from its summit to about 5,000 feet above 
sea level. In Tasmania the glaciation was naturally very heavy on the 
west coast and western highlands, the modern heavy rainfall, coming 
from the west, being at that time largely replaced by snowfall. Not 
only were the Western Tiers of Tasmania and the highlands of the 
west coast covered with firn-fields and glacier ice, but at the town- 
ship of Gormanston glacial boulder clays were formed only a few 
hundred feet above sea level, and on the west side of the Craycroft 
Range the moraine material descends to within 250 feet of sea level. This 
glaciation affected, probably synchronously, New Guinea, and it was 
probably during a phase of this glacial age that the rhododendron migrated 
from Papua to the Bellenden-Ker Range, of Queensland (over 5,000 feet 
high), where it has since become isolated through the amelioration of the 
climate. The phenomena of the maximum glaciation seem to call for a. 
lowering of temperature of approximately 9 degrees Fahr., as compared 
with that of the present day. 

(c) Partly synchronous, if not wholly synchronous, with this Ice Age, or 
possibly its interglacial phases (if there were any such), was an epoch when 
the central plains of Australia had a good rainfall, and the present area of 
internal drainage was only beginning to come into existence. Great herds of 
herbivores, of much larger size than their nearest modern allies, roamed over 
what are now the arid legions of the lower steppes of Australia, near Lakes 
Eyre, Frome, and Callabonna. This fauna comprised Ceratodus, Megalania 
prisca, Meiolonia, Pallimnarchus pollens, Diprotodon, Nototherium, Macropus, 
and Sceparnodon, with the probably carnivorous form Thylacoleo, and the 
carnivorous Thylacinus, Sarcophilus, and Canis dingo, while Sus papuensis 
found its way southwards from Papua, as far as the Darling Downs, of 
Queensland. Thus during this Kosciusko epoch Papua was still united to 
Austi-alia, and the recent discovery of a Nototherium {N. tasmanicum, Scott) 
at Mowbray Swamp, in the north-western part of Tasmania, taken in con- 
junction with other evidence, suggests that Tasmania was once more united 
to Australia by way of the Bassian Bridge. At least one gigantic ancestor 



288 Federal Handbook. 



of the emu Genyornis was associated with this fauna. This bird was pro- 
bably about 13 feet in height. A fine collection of this fauna is in the Adelaide 
Museum. 

{d) Subsidences complementary to the uplift no doubt commenced with 
the uplift, but became much more pronounced after the uplift ceased. The 
rift valleys, Torres Strait, Port Curtis, of Cairns, of Cooma, of Bass Strait, 
Hobart, Port Phillip, St. Vincent and Spencer's Gulfs, and Lake Torrens, 
and of the west coast of Western Australia gradually developed, together 
with those many faults traversing the highlands of the warped peneplains 
of Australia and Tasmania, whose unreduced scarps attest their comparatively 
recent origin. The recent volcanic craters of Mount Gambler, Tower Hill, 
etc., may be referred to this epoch. Possibly negritoid man entered Tasmania 
by way of the Pleistocene Bassian Bridge before its final collapse. Ever since 
the Kosciusko epoch canyon cutting has been proceeding down to the present 
day in the elevated peripheral portions of Australia and Tasmania, this process 
tending to push the divides further inland. 

Amongst recent formations may be mentioned the dune rock, partly 
cemented by lime, of Fremantle^, and the south-western coast of Western Aus- 
tralia, of Cape Northumberland, near the border of South A\xstralia and Vic- 
toria, and the dune rock of Warrnambool, Sorrento, etc. At Sorrento this dune 
rock is about 1,000 feet in thickness, and near Perth, in Western Australia, is at 
least as thick. The heavy silting along the Victorian coast, which has pro- 
duced the Gippsland Lakes, as well as silting ofi the Maryborough coast, 
where the dunes are 800 feet high, and the silting between Sharks Bay and 
North-west Cape, in Western Australia, are all connected with the cusps of 
slack water formed next the shore, where great ocean currents meet. Mention 
may also be made here of the sand dunes of the lower steppes of Australia, 
and of the Victoria Desert. The latter are only superficially formed of 
loose sand, to a depth of a foot or so, and then the formation passes into a 
tough calcareous rock. The Transcontinental railway from Perth, by way 
of Kalgoorlie to Adelaide, will have to be cut through a vast number of 
these dune ridges, which are from 30 feet up to 80 feet high in places. 
In the Lake Eyre region the sand dunes again are only superficially 
loose sand. Inside they are formed of a certain amount of loamy 
material, especially near the old deltas of Cooper's Creek, and of the 
Diamantina River. In most parts of Central Australia these dunes derive 
their sand from the breaking up of the Upper Cretaceous desert 
sandstone. 

In addition to the alluvial plains and rivers, mention may be made of the 
laterites (pindan gravels) of Western Australia, the nodular tufaceous lime- 
stone (" kunkar ") of South Australia, the saline deposits of the inland plains, 
and the coastal salinas. Subsidence has evidently been recently in progress 
at the southern end of Tasmania, and the laige " bank " recently 
discovered 200 mijes further south, is obviously an immense sunken 
segment of a once greater Australia. Submergence has also taken 
place for a great distance along the east coast of Australia. As already 
stated, this is partly due to the recent melting of ice and snow in Antarctica, 
bringing about a eustatic positive movement of sea level ; but it cannot 
be entirely due to this, as the recent submergence is in places of the order 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 289 

of fully 200 feet, and it is doubtful whether the ice of Antarctica, from the great 
ice age down to the present time, can have affected sea-level to the extent 
of more than about 100 feet. 

The so-called raised beach of about 15 feet is so general around Australia, 
that it is probably due to a recent eustatic negative movement of the sea 
surface. The 50 feet raised beach near Darwin is probably connected with 
recent orogenic movements in Papua. These recent movements have caused 
a local emergence of the coral reefs in south-eastern Papua of 1,000 up to 
2,000 feet. The Great Barrier Eeef of Queensland, some 1,200 miles in length, 
represents, in its uppermost portion, a marvellous area of growing reef The 
bulk of tbe reef appears to be formed of coral. 

Earthquake shocks, most frequent in tht. area between the gu fs of South 
Australia, Bass Strait, and Kosciusko, show that coastal readjustment is still 
in slow progress in those regions. In New Guinea sharp shocks proceed from 
near the active volcanic zone, near Mount Victory. Most of the earthquake 
.shocks which reach the eastern side of Australia emanate from the deep trench 
to the east of the Tongan and Kermadec Islands. Western Australia is 
practically free from earthquakes. 

5. — Pre=Historic Man. 

As is well known, the aboriginal inhabitants, now unfortunately extinct, of 
Tasmania belonged to the negrito and were in a palaeolithic state of civiliza- 
tion. They had no knowledge of producing a cutting edge on stone by 
grinding it down on a hone stone, all their instriments being of the rudest 
possible type, and roughly chipped. Neither had they any knowledge of 
building canoes of the sea-going t}^e, being satisfied to construct them from 
the bark of trees stripped off in long sheets, then sewn up at the ends and 
plugged with clay. In this frail craft they navigated their own rivers and 
lakes. No trace has been found in Tasmania of aboriginal man considerably 
antedating the coming of the white man. On the mainland of Australia the 
aboriginal attained to neolithic stage of civilization as far back as we have 
any traces of him. Up to the present the following appear to be the only 
evidences of man in Australia attaining to anything approaching high 
geological antiquity : — 

1. The Tasmanian aborigines probably crossed Bass Strait (as they were 
ignorant of the art of making sea-going canoes) by an almost continuous, if 
not continuous, land bridge. 

2. On the mainland of Australia there is possible evidence near Warrnam- 
bool of impressions attributable to human bodies and feet in some of the old 
cemented sand dunes. Many have doubted the genuineness of these 
imprints. In New South Wales several stone tomahawks were dug up a 
few years ago in cutting a canal at Shea's Creek, between Botany Bay and 
Redfem. These tomahawks were embedded in peat many feet in thickness 
underlying marine e.stuarine beds at a total deptli of 15 feet below the high 
water. It may be concluded that the whole of our coast-line has subsided 
by 15 feet, or else, as the result of the melting of ice and snow in the 
Antarctic regions, sea level has risen by that amount since the time when the 
aborigines lost their tomahawks in this swamp. In either case a 



290 Federal Handbook. 

considerable lapse of time, perhaps of tlie order of several tliousands of 
years, would be needed to account for this change in the relative level of 
land and sea. 

3. Statements have frequently been made that stone tomahawks have 
been discovered in the deep leads of Victoria. The following, as far as is 
known, is the only case where the stone tomahawk may possibly be considered 
as the same age as a deep lead : — Xear Maryborough, Victoria, in 1855, a 
basalt axe head was found at a depth of 4 feet from the surface in one of the 
tributaries of the main Bet Bet lead. The main lead is covered by basalt 
believed to be of Pleistocene age, but, as the tributary lead in which 
the axe head was found is not covered by basalt, the finding of an axe 
head at a depth of only 4 feet does not necessarily imply any great 
antiquity for it. 

6. Australian Qraptolites. 

By T. S. Hall, M.A., D.Sc, Lecturer in Biology in the University 
of Melbourne. 

Graptolites are found at innumerable localities in Victoria where Silurian 
or Ordovician rocks occur, but so far none have been found west of the 
meridian of Ballarat. The belt of old rocks is continued from eastern Vic- 
toria along tne inland slopes of the Divide far into New South Wales, and 
during the last few years have yielded graptolites from a few places. Tas- 
manian records are vague, but some identifiable forms have been obtained 
from boulders in the Permo-Carboniferous glacial beds at Wynyard. There 
are no records from the other States, but Lower Ordovician species have 
been found in New Zealand. 

Apparently the whole range of the fauna can be illustrated from Victoria, 
with perhaps the exception of Devonian and Cambrian forms. We can 
recognise the following subdivision of the rocks ; — 
I Upper 

! ;Darriwillian 

L < Lower 

1 Bendigonian 
f'Lancefieldian. 

Silurian. — Retiolites australis McCoy and two or three species of Diylo- 
graptidcB and Monograptus, including M. turriculatus, have been found in 
Victoria, and Monograptus occurs in New South Wales. 

Ordovician. — It has not been found convenient as yet to recognise 
the three usual subdivisions accepted in Europe, and we need only consider 
an upper and lower division. 

The Upper division is characterised by Dicranograptus, Dicellograptus, 
Leptograptus, Nemagraptus, Didymograptus, Diplograptus, Climacograptus, 
Cryptograptus, Glossograptus, Lasiograptus, Retiograptus, and Retiolites. The 
series is well represented in the eastern part of the State, and passes north 
into New Soutt Wales, where Lower Ordovician is not as yet known to be 
represented. A large numbei- of the species are new, but many northern 
hemisphere forms have been recognised. No detailed stratigraphical work 
has been done in these rocks. 



Ordovician J Lower i Castlemanian 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 291 

The Lower division has had more attention given to it, as it is displayed 
on many of our goldfields. 

Darriwillian. — No good exposures are known and specific records are 
few. Dicranograptidae are absent. Tlie following genera are represented : — 
Didymograptus, Tetragraptus, Loganograptus, Diplograptus, Climacograptus, 
Trigonograptus, Glossograptus, Lasiograptus, and others not detei-mined. 

CASTLEMA.NLAN. — The fauna is rich. Didymograptidae are well repre- 
sented. D. caduceus Salter (= D. gibherulus) is abundant throughout, and 
passes up. I), hifidus and its allies are found only in the lowest beds, and 
pass down into the top of the next division. The relative position of these 
two species is peculiar and well proved in various localities. 

Bendigonla-N. — The most abundant fossil is Tetragraptus fruticosus. 
Bryograptus occurs in tlie lowest beds, though it is generally regarded as 
Cambrian in Europe. Tetragraptus approximatus Nicholson is also found 
at the base, and is in one locality associated with Lancefieldian forms. It 
is thus of stratigraphical importance. The Bendigonian faima is rich in 
species. 

Lancefieldian. — Bryograptus, several species of Clonograptus and 
Dictyonema occur. Lithologically similar rocks with the same fauna have 
been recognised by me from the south-west corner of New Zealand, more 
than 1,000 miles away. 

There are several apparent inversions of the European sequence of species, 
and Euedmann has shown that the Australian sequence is practically that 
of New York, and both agree in differing slightly from the European. 

7. Notes on the Palaeontology of Australia. 

By W. S. Dun, Lecturer in PalcBontology in the University of Sydney. 

The general character of the fauna of the Palseozoic of Australia as a 
whole, is its cosmopolitan nature, no definite Australian fauna being pre- 
sented until the Per mo-Carboniferous. 

Cambrian. — Fossiliferous limestones and shales of Cambrian age occur 
in Western Australia, South Australia, Northern Territory, Victoria, and 
Tasmania. Olenollus beds w'th Salterella occur in the Kimberley District 
(W.A.). In Yorke's Peninsula (S.A.), Archseocyathinae limestones are well 
developed, also beds containing Micromitra, Kutorgina, Obolella, Nisusia, 
Eoorthis, Huenolla, Stenotheca, Ophileta, Salterella, Hyolithes, Dolichometopus, 
Conocephalites, Olenollus, Microdiscus, Ptychoparia. At Beltana occurs 
the most important horizon of ArchseocyathiniB so far discovered ; eight 
genera and thirty-two species have already been descrilied. 

In the Northern Territory, from Ekeldra, Agnostus, Paradoxides, Micro- 
discus, and Ptychoparia have been recorded. 

In Victoria, in north-eastern Gippsland, near Mount Wellington, occur 
limestones with Plectorthis, Lingalella, Scenella, Agnostus, Ptychoparia, and 
Grepicephalus. 

The Heathcotian beds containing Dinesus and Notasaphns may prove to 
be either Cambrian or Carabro-Ordovician. In Tasmania ArchsoocyathinjB 
occur and quartzites yielding Dikelocephalus and Concephalites. 



292 Federal Handbook. 



Ordovician. 

In Central Australia Ordovician limestones contain Endoceras, Orthoceras, 
Asaphus spp., Ctenodonta, Raphistoma, and Ophileta. 

In Tasmania the Gordon River limestones with Cyrtodonta, Ctenodonta, 
Tellinomya, Bellerophon, Helicotoma, Hormotoma, Raphistoma may prove to 
be of Silurian age. Ordovician brachiopods and trilobites are also found in 
the Florentine Valley. 

Silurian. 

The Silurian of Australia occurs entirely in the eastern States, and is of a 
true cosmopolitan t}'pe, and the fossiliferous limestones and shales of New 
South Wales and Victoria may be correlated with the Wenlock and Ludlow 
in part. There is an abundant molluscan, brachiopod, trilobite, and coelen- 
terate fauna, the main characteristics being the great variety of Ealysites in 
New South Wales ; of Tryplasma, Spongophyllum, and Rhizophyllum, and 
the presence of endemic rugosa such as Mucophyllum, Mictocystis, Arachno- 
phyUmn, Vepresiphyllum, etc.; Conchidium and Barratidella horizons are 
well developed in New South Wales. 

Devonian. 

Devonian strata occur in Western Australia and the eastern States. 
In Western Australifi, the Kimberley, Napier Range, and Gascoyne river 
beds contained a Lower or Middle Devonian fauna — Stromatoporoids, Cyatho- 
phyllum, Phillipsastrea, tabulate corals, Atrypa reticularis. Certain of the 
fossils recorded from these beds, however, belong to adjacent Permo-Car- 
bonifeious areas. 

In Victoria, in Gippsland, Middle Devonian limestone with Spirifera 
yassensis and Receptaculites are well developed. Freshwater Upper 
Devonian or Lower Carboniferous beds contain ArchcBopteris, Sphenopteris, 
and Cordaites — these beds also occur in southern New South Wales. 

In New South Wales the Lower Devonians are well developed in the 
Murrumbidgee District and are characterized by a great development of 
Receptaculites, one species attaining a diameter of at least a foot. Tabulate 
corals are abundant. The typical fossils are species of Actinocystis, Diphy- 
pkyllum, and Spirifera yassensis. 

The Middle Devonian are developed in the Western Districts, and contain 
varieties of Spirifera cristata and pterinoid bivalves, etc. 

The Upper Devonian sediments of New South Wales are of two types, 
the arenaceous of the Western Districts containing Rhynchonella pleurodon, 
Spirifera disjuncta, and Lepidodendron, Lepidodondron australe, and that of 
the New England District composed of coralline limestones, claystones, and 
cherts. 

The limestones contain such corals as Favosites, Heliolites, Sanidophyllum, 
Spongophyllum, Diphyphyllum, and Syringopora — all species distinct from 
the Silurian and little in common with the Lower Devonian series. The 
limestones and cherts comprise a great development of interbedded 
Radiolarian rocks. The upper mudstones contain Lepidodondron australe 
in abundance. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 293 

In Queensland the Fanning River and Burdeldn limestones are corralliae 
and contain abundance of Alveolites, ArcBOpora, Campophylhun. Stringo- 
cephalus, Atrypa, etc. 

Carboniferous. 

Beds of this age occur in New South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland. 

The Mansfield beds of Victoria, regarded as Lower Carboniferous, contain 
Lepidodendron australe and fish — Gyracanihides, Acanthodes, Strepsodus, 
Elonichthys, etc. — it is possible these beds may prove to be in part Upper 
Devonian. 

In New South Wales, marine and freshwater Carboniferous beds occur. 
The marine fauna is of the mountain limestone type, and consists mostly of 
cosmopolitan types of brachiopoda, Productus semireticulatus, Orthis resupi- 
nata, Spirifera striata, Phillipsia, Gri-ffithides, and B r achy meto pus. 

The coral fauna is typical — Zaphrentis, Cyathophyllum, Lithostrotion, 
Michelinia, etc. 

Mesoblastus and Tricoelocriuus occur in Queensland. 

The freshwater beds have a jMiddle Carboniferous facies with Aneimites 
ovata, Cardiopteris, and Lepidodendron veltheimianum. 

In Queensland the Star beds, well developed around Rock- 
hampton, have a fauna very similar tc» that of the New South Wales 
series. 

Doubtfid Carboniferous beds containing Lepidodendron occur in Western 
Australia. 

A fact of importance in Eastern Australia is that no Carboniferous species 
extend into the overlying Permo-Carboniferous, and that there is a well- 
marked unconformity between the two systems. 

Permo-Carboniferous . 

Of the Australian Palaeozoic faunas that which attracts most attention 
is the Marine Permo-Carbonifeious, and the interest is twofold, due in the 
first place to the change which without doubt in great part effected the 
glacial phase which occurred at the initiation of sedimentation, and the 
efiect of land barriers hindering migration between the eastern and western 
Permo-Carboniferous shores. 

The Eastern Australian Permo-Carboniferous fauna may be regarded 
as exhibiting the typical Australian facies, containing as it does the develop- 
ment of many purely Australian types. The two main divisions of the 
marine sediments — the Lower and Upper Marine series (separated in typical 
localities by a freshwater phase — the Greta coal measures) vary little in 
character in New South Wales, Queensland, and Tasmania. 
The principal elements of the fauna are— 

Foraminifera. — Nubecularia, Pelosina, Uyperammina, Haplophrag- 
rnium, Lituola, Endothyra, Lagena, Nodosaria, Genilzina, etc., etc. 
Nubecularia is in great abundance and the arenaceous and sub- 
arenaceous types preponderate. Horizons occur in both Lower 
and Upper Marines and in association with the Pokolbin (Lower 
Marines) horizon, and also in the Wollong (Upper Marine) are 
glacial beds, indicating the cooling of the water. 



294 Federal Handbook. 



Spongida. — Sponges are rare, tke anchoring spicules of 
Hyalostelia, Lasiodadia, and certain burrowing sponges {Clio- 
nolithus) are found in the Lower and Upper Marines of New 
South Wales. 

C(elentekata. — One of the noticeable features of the Permo- 
Carboniferous of eastern Australia is the impoverished 
Coelenterata fauna, due without doubt to the glacial conditions 
at the initiation of sedimentation. A few species of Zaphrentoid 
corals, close to Hinde's genus Plerophjllum, occur showing 
an extravagant development of stereoplasma. The tabulate 
Trachypora forms a well-marked zone fossil in the Upper 
Marines. 

EcHiNODERMATA. — This phyllum is of particular interest. Blastoids 
and cystoids are absent ; the Crinoidea are represented by the 
giant Phialocrinus princeps of the Upper Marines, 4| inches in 
diameter. Trihrachiocrinus, a dicyclic form with large radianal 
and " X " plate, three double bianchia and two single — this genus 
is peculiar to Eastern Australia. A large ArchcBOcidaris and several 
species of Palasterids {Etheridgeaster, Mo^mster, and Palaeaester) 
occur in the Lower Marines, one, Etheridgeaster giganteus, having 
a span of 7 inches. 

Bryozoa. — The great development of the trepostomatous Stenopora 
is a characteristic of this period in Eastern Australia. The massive 
S. crinita forms irregular polyzoaria of from 1 to 2 feet in size. 
Dendroid and flabellate types are also common and present many 
species as yet undescribed. 

The Fenestellidse are also well developed. Fenestella is rare, 
but such types as Phyllopora, Polypora, and Protoretepora being 
extremely abundant, and in some cases form distinct limestones 
in the Lower Marines. Feiiestellid?e are equally developed in the 
Lower and Upper Marines and in all provinces. 

Brachiopoda. — This may be regarded as a Martiniopsis fauna. This 
protean genus is extremely abundant in all suitable sediments. 
Associated with it are winged SpirifercB, all strongly ridged, Spiri- 
ferina dielasma, Chonetes, Productus, Strophalosia, Aulosteges, 
Lingula, and Orbicula. In Queensland, in the Bowen beds, we 
get as well Derbyia senilia. It must be noted in contradistinction 
to the Permo-Carboniferous Brachiopod fauna of Western 
Australia and the Northern Territory that Carboniferous 
species are entirely absent and that there is an absence of the 
Orthidse and Leptcena group, Athyris, Cyrtina syringothyris, and 
Reticularia. 

Pelecypoda. — It is in this group of the MoUusca that what may bt 
termed the Pacific facies of the Australian Permo-Carboniferous 
asserts itself with purely endemic genera as Cleobis, Mceonia, 
Astartila, Pachydomus, Notomya, Aphanaia, Merismopteria, Clarkia, 
Beltopecten — a giant form, a transition between Aviculopecten and 
Pecten-Stutchhuria, an edentulous variant of Pleurophorus. Chceno- 
nomya (Meek) of the Nebraska-Permian is very characteristic 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 295 

of certain estuarine deposits. The most interesting type is Eury- 
desma, mainly characteristic of the Lower Marines, noteworthy 
for its absence from Western AustraUa and its presence in the olive 
shales of the Himalayas, and the Marine Karoo of German West 
Africa. The fauna is noteworthy for the preponderance of eden- 
tulous gaping types. Cosmopolitan genera, such as Nuculana, 
Scaldia, Cardiomorpha (?), Solecurtus, Aviculopecten, Solenopsis, 
Modiolopsis also occur. The fauna is evenly distributed along the 
east coast. 

Gasteropoda. — There is nothing distinctive in the eastern Gasteropod 
fauna which includes Platyschisma, Straparollus, and various Pleuro- 
tomarioids — Keeneia, Ptycomphalina, Mourlonia, and a Naticoid 
type, together with a patelloid genus and Orthonychia. 

Pteropoda and CoNULARiDiE. — HyoUthes is common, and a giant 
Conidaria reaching a length of 20 inches, occurs in the eastern 
provinces. 

Cephalopoda are uncommon, Orthoceras and Agathiceras {Gonia- 
tites) being abundant in the Ravensfield sandstone of New South 
Wales. 

The Western Australia Fauna. 

In Western Australia it has been customary to class certain formations 
as Carboniferous and certain as Permo-Carboniferous, but there is good 
reason to believe that the entire series, developed in the Irwin, Gascoyne, 
Mingenew, Minilya, Lyons River Districts, and Kimberley is more properly 
Permo-Carboniferous as regards the mingling of the faunas. 

One of the prominent features of the Eastern AustraUan Permo-Car- 
boniferous fauna is the absolute absence of any Carboniferous species, whereas 
in the west, together with Indian species and local varieties, there are Car- 
boniferous types such as Orthis resupinata, Rhipidomella, Productus semire- 
ticulatus, Leptcena analoga, Phillipsia, etc. — forms which in Eastern Aus- 
tralia are confined to the Star beds of Queensland and New South Wales, 
beds separated from the Permo-Carboniferous of that region by a well-marked 
unconformity. Taking into consideration the fact that the so-called Permo- 
Carboniferous sedimentation of both eastern and western Australia was 
initiated by glacial stages which must be regarded as synchronous, this 
mingling of faunas in Western Australia points to a direct communication 
with the Permo-Carboniferous coast line of the Himalayan and Salt Range 
Region. The fact that certain Producti, Pectinida^, Terebratulidaj, and 
Spirifeidae of the West have a close resemblance to Eastern Australian types 
may, perhaps, be regarded as instances of parallel development, rather than 
of specific identity. 

The Permo-Carboniferous ol the Nonhern Territory has western 
affinities. 

As regards the flora of the Permo-Carboniferoua, nothing need be 
said other than that a Lower Gondwana flora is preserved in both 
Western and Eastern Australia. The earlier beds are characterized by 
Gangamopteroid types, the upper by Glossopteris and PhyUotheca, more 
especially. 



296 Federal Handbook, 



Mesozoic. 

The Mesozoic rocks of Australia, fresh water and marine, range from 
Trias to Cretaceous. 

The freshwater beds present in all the States are of Trias and Jurassic 
age, and in Eastern Australia there is good reason to regard the so-called 
Jurassic (Ipswich) system as being the freshwater series directly succeeded 
by the Marine Cretaceous. 

In Western Australia fresh water beds of Jurassic age occur at Mingenew 
with Otozamites and Plagiophyllum. At Champion Bay Belemnites, Dor- 
setensia, Stephanoceras, Trigonia, etc., occur. At the Greenough River are 
Oolites yielding Alectryonia MarsJiii, Ctenostreon pectiniformis, Radula dupli- 
cata, Trigonia, etc. It is possible that the Gingin chalk is of Cretaceous age. 
The fauna of the Marine Mesozoic of Western Australia exhibit marked 
affinities (and identity) with European and Asiatic species. 

In the Northern Territory, at Point Charles, there is evidence of an abun- 
dant Cretaceous fauna Aucella, Scaphites, Histrichoceras, etc., dwarfed forms 
in almost every case, and having Gault affinities. 

Almost as marked as the difference between the eastern and western 
Permo-Carboniferous fauna is the lack of community between the Marine 
Mesozoic fauna of the east and west. Stratigraphical evidence points to 
the fact that there is a continuity of sedimentation from at latest Jurassic 
to the end of Cretaceous time, and this has led to an apparent minghng of 
faunas. The Cretaceous Mediterranean occupied portions of the States of 
Queensland, New South Wales, and South Australia, and is characterized by 
numerous species peculiar to the region and many endemic genera among 
the MoUusca. The most typical forms are Maccoyella, Pseudavicula, and Fis- 
silunula, all endemic types occurring in both Lower and Upper Cretaceous. 
The cephalopodan fauna is not larger, but is noteworthy for the great size 
of the Crioceras and Ancyloceras group. Icthyosaurus, PUsiosaurus, and 
Gimoliosaurus are represented by several species. The nature of the fauna 
points to the fact that the barrier wliich prevented the mingling of the Eastern 
and Western Permo-Carboniferoua faunas persisted into late Mesozoic time. 

The Mesozoic flora of Eastern Australia may be divided into three groups 
— (1) the Ipswich flora of Queensland, the Clarence basin of New South Wales, 
the South Gippsland basin of Victoria, and the Lake Eyre basin of South 
Australia ; (2) the Tasmanian Upper coal measures ; and (3) the Hawkes- 
bury series of the Sydney-Blue Mountain District. 

(1) The Ipswich, etc., series. — These beds possess the cosmopolitan Jurassic 
vegetation with Cladophebis denticulata, various species of Thinnfeldia, 
Tceniopteris daintreei, Podozamites, Baiera, etc., etc. They occupy the 
lower portion of the great artesian basin and are succeeded conformably 
by the Marine Cretaceous shales and sandstones. The rather scanty evidence 
at present available points to the fact that the sagging of the Mediterranean 
region was associated in its early stages with lacustrine conditions leading 
up to an invasion of the sea and marine sedimentation. These conditions 
on the coastal district ceased at the close of fresh water sedimentation, except 
in the Maryborough district, Queensland, where both fresh water and marine 
sedimentation took place 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 297 

(2) The Upper coal measures of Tasmania maybe correlated with the Gipps- 
land measures of Jurassic age. Tceniopteris daintreei is wanting, but Clado- 
phebis denticulata is abundant with Thinnfeldia, Phyllotheca, etc. 

(3) In the Sydney area occurs the Hawkesbury series, made up of the 
Narrabeen, Hawkesbury, and Wiannamatta Stages. The Narrabeen shales 
succeed directly after the Upper coal measures (Permo-Carboniferous) with 
no break in sedimentation, and a mingling of the Glossopteris and Lower 
Mesozoic flora — Glossopteris and Schizoneura. 

The Narrabeen, Hawkesbury, and Wiannamatta Stages have a well 
developed flora with Thinnfeldia odontopteroides, in several varieties, Macro- 
tcenopteris, Alethopteris, conifers, and Phyllotheca ; there are distinct 
differences from the flora of the Ipswich Series, which are possibly due to 
more arid conditions. The Hawkesbury sandstones and Wiannamatta shalea 
have a well-developed fish fauna — Cleithrolepis, Gosfordia, Semionotus, Dic- 
tyopyge, Belonorhynchus, etc., together with Labyrinthodonta, Platyceps, 
Bothriceps, Mastodonsaurus in part of Palseozoic and of Rhsotic affinities. 
A depauj)erate foraminiferal horizon occurs in the Wiannamatta shales. 
It is usual to regard these beds of Triassic age in part, possibly slightly older 
than the Ipswich. 

At Talbragar, New South Wales, beds with Tceniopteris daintreei, Podoza- 
mites, Palissya, Alithopteris, contain a distinctive fish fauna — Leptolepis, 
Coccolepis, Aphnelepis, etc., etc. 

Tertiary.- — Terrestrial beds containing plant remains occur in the 
various StateS' — ^the oldest series occur in tlie deep leads which may date 
back to late Eocene or early Miocene time. The vegetation of these deposits 
in Eastern Australia bears considerable resemblance to that of the modern 
" brushes " and afford evidence of more humid conditions. 

In the late Tertiary and Pleistocene time, the inland plains supported a 
giant marsupial fauna, together with Eatite h'nds—Diprotodon, Nototherium, 
members of the Pliascolomidse, Thylacoleo, Macropodidae, Monotremes, 
such as Proechidna and Ornithorhynchus ; Birds — Dromornis, Genyornis, etc. ; 
Reptilia — Megalania, Crocodilus, Meiolania, etc. 

The giant members of this fauna have been found in all the states, but 
are most abundant in the great central plains of Queensland, New South 
Wales, and South Australia, where their remains are found in old lake basins, 
mud springs, and river beds. Their destruction was due to great diminution 
of rainfall which took place in late Pleistocene time. 

8. Australian Cainozoic System. 

By F. Chapman, A.L.S., Palceontologist to the National Museum, Melbourne. 

The Australian Cainozoic system is remarkable for its great development 
of Miocene sediments. These are interposed between an important but 
locally developed Oligocene series below, and a more widely extended Pliocene 
series above. 

In Victoria and South Australia, where the Cainozoic system is 
best developed, the beds can be subdivided into four principal series, 
for they are really more than stages, as time and further research 
may show. Local terms to denote these series have been suggested, as 

C.121.'')4. u 



298 



Federal Handbook. 



sliown in the following table, which also gives the probable equivalent to 
the corresponding European formations, according to the several authors 
quoted. 



McCoy and Chapman. 


Hall and Pritchard. 


Tate and Dennant. 


Pleistocene 












Upper Pliocene 

man) 
Lower Pliocene 
Oligocene 


(Chap- 


Werrikooian (PUocene) 

Kaiimnan (Miocene) 
Balcombian (Eocene) . . 
Janjukian (Eocene) 


Pleistocene (Tate) 

PUocene (Dennant) 

Miocene 

Eocene 

? OUgocene (Tate) 

Eocene (Tate and 


Den- 


Miocene 




Aldingan (Eocene 
part) 


ill 


nant) 
Eocene in part 





Balcombian Series. 

General Characters. — Commencing with the Balcombian, these beds for 
the most part consist of sands and shelly marls, largely foraminiferal in places, 
and containing in the shallower deposits a very rich molluscan fauna, together 
with the remains of fishes, Crustacea, especially ostracoda, polyzoa, echino- 
derms, gorgonids, corals, sponges, and the foraminifera aforesaid. Inter- 
calated with the sandy clays and marls are beds of brown coal, which at 
Altona Bay and Newport, in Victoria, have been proved of considerable 
thickness. At one bore near Laverton (parish of Truganina, Section VII.), 
a bed of brown coal was struck at 3-47 feet, having a thickness of 74 feet. 
A bore at Morwell, in Gippsland, 1,000 feet deep, passed through 888 feet of 
brown coal. Although the actual age of the latter occurrence has 
not been proved, it is probably similar to the brown coal of the Port Phillip 
area. 

Chief Fossils. — (B. = Balcombian ; J. = Janjukian ; K. — Kaiimnan). 
Lanina apiculata, Carcharodon, Megalodon, Aturia australis (B. — K.), 
Ancilla psevdaustralis (B. — K.), Valuta hamiltonensis, Fasciolaria lameUifera, 
Eburnopsis aukicoessa, Cyprcea ampulkicea, C. eximia (B. and J.), Turbo 
hamiltonensis, Pecten murrayanus (B. — K.), Barbatia celleporacea (B. — K.), 
Crassatellites dennanti (B. and J.), Chama lameUifera (B. and J.), 
Magellania coricensis (B. and J.), Clypeaster gippslandicus (B. — K.), 
Echinolampas gambierensis (B. and J.), Placotrochus deltoideus (B. — K.), 
Platytrochus vacuus, Bactronella parvula, Amphistegina lessoni (B.— K, most 
abundant in J.). 

Localities. — The number of outcrops and exposures of the Balcombian 
series is seen to be very limited when the faunas have been carefully examined. 
The best-known and most accessible localities are Balcombe's Bay, near 
Mornington and Grice's Creek, near Frankston, both in Port PhiUip. The 
gash made through superficial beds by the Muddy Creek, near Hamilton, 
reveals the lowest beds of the district at Clifton Bank, where they are brought 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 299 

up by a slight monoclinal fold in the otherwise nearly horizontal strata. 
The beds here have their basement in blue clay containing a rich gasteropod 
fauna, the clay sometimes containing much glauconite and rolled fragments 
of polyzoa and cetacean remains. The presence of glauconite points to a 
fairly deep water origin for this bed. This dark clay bed passes rather 
rapidly into a brownish sandy marl with a rich moUuscan fauna, gradually 
becoming more polyzoal in character towards the top, where, as recently 
found at 20 chains up stream in the Muddy Creek, it passes into the pink 
and yellow polvzoal limestone of true Janjukiau character, and with foramini- 
fera of a Burdigalian type. 

The important bore at Sorrento, near the eastern head of Port Phillip, 
did not at its greatest depth, of 1,693 feet, reach the bottom of the Balcombian 
Series, which is here between 300 and 400 feet thick, so far as proved. On 
the other hand, bores at Altona Bay and Williamstown have proved the 
basement bed as a gritty quartz sand passing up into typical shell marls 
and blue clays with brown coal. The intercalated terrigenous and estuarine 
beds of the Balcombian, entitle it to be classed as a fluviomarine series in 
the areas just named, as much as those beds of similar age in Europe as in 
the Isle of Wight and Belgian Oligocene ; whilst the North German Oligocene, 
being largely marine, may be classed with that of the lower beds at Muddy 
Creek and Sorrento. The Balcombian Series appears to be confined to the 
State of Victoria. 

Janjukian Series. 

General Characters. — This is by far the most important group in the 
Australian Cainozoic system, and presents some remarkable and variable 
phases. On the terrestrial side, the leaf-beds with Cinnamomuin, Laurus, 
and Sterculia probably come within this series, since stratigraphically the 
Maddingley leaf-beds seem to graduate into the limestones and marls of the 
Moorabool River area, finding their place in the Janjukian Series. So that 
in one area alone, the Geelong — Ballarat gulf and valley, we have fairly 
deep and clear water deposits, terrigenous shell-bearing beds formed closer 
inshore, and lacustrine accumulations. 

The Corio Bay, Bairnsdale, and Fyansford fossiliferou.s deposits probably 
represent the basal part of the Miocene, to the middle of which period I 
have referred the Janjukian of Torquay and Batesford where, at the former 
place Spirulirostra occurs, and at the latter, Burdigalian foramiuifera as 
Lepidocyclina tournoueri and L. tnarginata. In all probaljility. the general 
polyzoal facies properly belongs to the Middle Miocene. 

At Bird Rock, Torquay, a magnificent cliff section is exposed, showing a 
vertical succession of 273 feet. The beds form a dome-shaped anticline, 
the centre of which is at Bird Rock. Forming the lowest of the .series in 
this area, they can be traced either way along the shore where they pass up 
into a polyzoal and echinoid limestone with Heteropora, Selenaria, Cellepora 
(with large ramose and rod-like zoaria), and with Echinocyamus {ScutelUna) 
patella. 

In other localities enormous deposits of both hard and friable limestone 
are developed, which point to deposition in a rapidly subsiding marine basin 
at moderate depths, as witnessed by the presence of the larger shelled 



300 Federal Handbook. 



foraminifera. These local foraminiferal deposits, as compared with those in 
coral reef areas at the present day, seem to indicate any depth between 20 
and 60 fathoms, whilst the polyzoal rock must have accumulated at a depth 
averaging 100 fathoms, as borne out by recent dredgings in the Southern 
Ocean by the Federal Trawler Endeavour. 

As was seen from the previous list of Balcombian fossils, many species 
range throughout the Cainozoic. Other species are pecuUar to that series, 
but they are very rare. In the Jaujukian Series, however, a great accession 
to the number of new forms takes place ; although where the argillaceous 
conditions of the underlying Balcombian have continued, those older species 
persist into the newer strata. The limestone facies brings in quite a new 
population, for that condition of deposition was markedly absent from the 
Balcombian. The rule which governed the maximum development, gene- 
rally in the Miocene, of certain fossil types in Em'ope, as Clypeaster for example, 
obtains here, since in one species, C. gippslandicus, the test is of medium- 
size in the Balcombian, gigantic in the Janjukian at Bairnsdale, and small 
again in the Kalimnan. Many other examples could be added, as those of 
Ldnthia and Spondylus. 

Chief Fossils. — Cetacea — Ziphius geelongensis, Parasqiuilodon wilkinsoni. 
Fishes — Carcharodon auriculatus, Carcharoides totuserratus. MoUusca — Spiruli- 
rostra curta (only two other species known, and both from the Miocene, viz., 
S. bellardii and S. hcernesi), Voluta macroptem, Volutilitkes anticingulatus, 
Eburnopsis tesselatus, Morio wilsoni, Cyprcea consobrina., C. platyrhyncha, 
Cerithium pritchardi, Turritella septifraga, Turbo etheridgei, Pleurotomaria 
tertiaria, Spondylus gcederopoides, Pecten eyrei, Limopsis insolita, Crassatellites 
oblonga. Brachiopods — Terebratula aldingce, Acantliothyris squamosa. 
Crustacea — Lepas pritchardi. Vermes — Ditrupa cornea var. wormbetiensis, 
Serpula ouyenensis. Echinoids — Cidaris australice, Cassidulus australicB, 
Brissofsis archeri, Eupatagus rotundus. Coral? — Flabellum distitictum, 
Deltocyathus subviola, Stephanotrochus tatei, Graphularia senescens (J. and K.). 
Sponges — Ecionema newberyi, Plectroninia halli, Tretocalia pezica. Fora- 
minifera — Gypsina hoivchini, Rotalia calcar, Amphistegina lessonii, Cyclo- 
clypeus pustulosus, Lepidocyclina tournoueri, L. tnargitiata. 

Localities. — In Victoria — Spring Creek Series, Torquay (glauconitic and 
yellow marls, and polyzoal limestone) ; Waurn Ponds (polyzoal limestone and 
marls) ; Moorabool River and Batesford [Lepidocyclina and polyzoal lime- 
stone) ; Curlewis (polyzoal limestone and marls with calcareous sponges) ; 
Grange Burn, Hamilton (polyzoal Limestone with Lepidocyclina andA7nphis- 
tegina) ; Fhnders (polyzoal limestone with calcareous sponges) ; Flemington, 
lower beds (fossihferous ironstone) ; Keilor (foraminiferal Limestone) ; Aire 
coastal series (marls and lignitic clays) ; Birregurra (grey and yellow marls) ; 
Bairnsdale {Amphistegina limestone and yellow fossiliferous marls) ; Corio 
Bay and Fyansford (yellow marls) ; bores in Mallee (white, polyzoal hme- 
stone and glauconitic marls). 

In South Austraha — Mount Gambler (white polyzoal limestone) ; Aldinga, 
lower beds (clays, glauconite marls, and limestones) ; banks of Murray River 
(polyzoal Umestone) ; Murray desert. 

Tasmania — Table Cape, near Wynyard, includes Crassatellites bed and 
overlying Turritella bed. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 301. 

Probably the New Soutb Wales leaf-beds (Dalton and Gunning) belong 
here. Their flora is largely that of Bacchus Marsh, Narracan, Berwick, 
Pitfield, Cobungra, Dargo, and Bogong. 

Kalimnan Series. 

General Characters. — In the Sorrento bore the Janjukian marls pass in- 
sensibly upwards into the Kalimnan, without much lithological change ; 
and by their containing a considerable amount of glauconite, denote that they 
were formed in moderately deep water. At Beaumaris, however, where these 
beds are well exposed in the chfi face, the rock is a yellow sandy marl, with 
numerous shells and sharks' teeth and occasional bands of fossils. The beds 
at Beaumaris are shallower in character, and evidence of current action is 
afforded by a nodule bed with numerous fish-teeth and rolled fossils at the 
base of the series. This nodule bed exactly corresponds in stratigraphical 
position with that at Muddy Creek and Grange Burn. The Kalimnan series 
at the latter localities consist of quite shallow water deposits, with Mytiliis, 
Natica, Nassa, and Barnea ; whilst the thick-shelled Trigonia howitli is 
further evidence in support of its shallow water origin. By the presence of 
Scaldicetus and other cetacean remains, the Lower Phocene age of this series 
as stated originally by McCoy, is substantiated. 

Chief Fossils. — Cetacea — Scaldicetus tnacgeei, Physetodon haileyi. Fishes 
— Oxyrhina hastalis, Galeocerdo aduncus, Cestracion cainozoicus, Diodon for- 
mosus. MoUusca — Ancilla papillata, Valuta fulgetroides, V. masoni, Fustis 
gippslandicus, Natica cunninghamensis, Eglisia triplicata, Dentalium largi- 
crescens, Pecten antiaustralia, Perna percrassa, Glycimeris halli, Trigonia 
margaritacea var. acuticostata, Sunetta gibberula, Macira hamiltonensis. 
Corals — Tretnatotrochus clarhei, Notophyllia gracilis. 

Localities. — Upper beds. Muddy Creek ; upper series at Shelf ord ; lower 
Glenelg Eiver ; Beaumaris ; Gippsland lakes ; bores in Mallee, at 100 to 
250 feet ; Sorrento bore, at 585 to 741 feet (circ.) ; upper Murray cliffs ; 
Adelaide ; Haddon, Vict, (deep leads with plant remains). 

Werrikooian Series. 

In Upper Pliocene times the southern part of the continent had risen 
considerably, and corresponding denudation took place. The country must 
have supported a rich fauna, largely marsupial, of which we have evidence in 
Phascolomys pliocenus, of the Dunolly Gold Drift. The type locahty of the 
Werrikooian is Limestone Creek, Glenelg River, where a rich marine molluscan 
fauna, with a large percentage of living species is found. The Upper beds of 
Moorabool Viaduct appear to belong here. 

Pleistocene. 

The inland and coastal deposits such as cave floors, volcanic tuffs, and 
consolidated dunes afford evidence of many extinct and living marsupial 
genera, among the former being Nototherium, Diprolodon, Procoptodon, and 
Palorchestes ; while the giant emu — Genyornis — occurs in the Diprotodon 
swamps of Lake Callabonna, South Australia, and also at Mount Gambler, 
and in Queensland. Remains of Dromornis, a struthious bird as large as 
the moa, occurs in the PUocene of Queensland, New South Wales, and South 



302 Federal Handbook. 



Australia. The volcauic tuffs of Tower Hill, Victoria, must be very late 
Pleistocene, for they overlie beds of marine shells identical in species with 
those now found living a short distance away on the sea-coast. 

The physiographicai results of a study of the Cainozoics show that 
in Oligocene times the land suffered much oscillation, subsidence being 
sometimes in evidence, at others elevation. The climate was then 
warm-temperate to sub-tropical. With the Miocene was ushered in a great 
steady movement of subsidence, as shown by the great limestone series, 
with only occasional elevation, when the dynamical movements expressed 
themselves in volcanic outbursts, the older basalt filling up the valleys both 
inland and coastal, as at Dargo and Flinders respectively. The climate 
was probably warm-temperate. In the Lower Pliocene or Kalimnan times, 
elevation re-commenced, and gave rise to the shell-banks and shallow-water 
marls. The molluscan genera at this time indicate a climate similar to that 
now enjoyed. In Upper Pliocene and Pleistocene times, there is evidence 
for the belief that the climate became even colder than now, due probably 
to uplift, for estuarine sands found in the Mallee borings, perhaps 300 feet 
above sea level indicate a sub-temperate faimal character. 

9. Igneous Rocks. 

By T. W. Edgeworth David, C.M.G., D.Sc, F.R.S., and Eniest W. Skeats, 
D.Sc, A.R.C.S., F.G.S., Professor of Geology in the University of Melbourne. 

Pre-Cambrian. 

The oldest known volcanic rocks in the Commonwealth are those of the 
Norseman and other regions of the great gold-bearing belts in the southern 
part of Western Australia. These are of the nature of amygdaloidal dole- 
rites associated with contemporaneous tufi. Further north, as at Kalgoorlie 
and Coolgardie, these volcanic rocks have been altered into hornblende and 
chlorite schists, commonly spoken of as the " greenstone " schists, and it is 
in them that most of the payable gold-bearing belts occur. In the Pilbara 
district, rocks of this type belong to a lower division of the Algonkian group, 
known as the Warrawoona series. This is followed by a later Algonkian 
series — the Mosquito series — in which the Pre-Cambrian group terminates in 
that district. Plutonic rocks are also widely represented in the Pre-Cam- 
brian group. For example, in Western Australia there are huge belts of 
granite passing into gneiss and traversed by veins of pegmatite. In places 
the granite intersects older diorite rocks. In other places, as at Kalgoorlie, 
serpentine occurs in the same group. The interesting observation has been 
made, at the Phillips Eiver gold-field, on the south coast of Western Aus- 
tralia, that the local granite is of a very marked albite type, in fact it is almost 
devoid of any potash, but relatively high in soda. In the same region a 
quartz-ceratophyre has been identified, and the interesting question here 
suggests itself as to whether we may not have representatives of the third 
great division of igneous rocks — third in relation to the well recognised alkali 
and calcic types, namely the spilitic suite. From the Blyth Range, a myrme- 
kite granite has been described, showing gridiron structure of quartz-felspar 
intergrowth, not original, and like that of similar granites, probably Archaean, 
in Sweden and Finland. It may be added that in the Phillips River 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 303 

gold-field albite-pegmatite is of common occurrence, in which, coarsely 
crystalline spodumene is associated with the albite. All these rocks are of 
Pre-Cambrian age. 

In reference to its Pre-Cambrian igneous rocks, the State of South Aus- 
traUa is considered to be a petrographical province, the characteristic feature 
of which is the high percentage of titanium oxide, and, to a less degree, the 
abundance of soda. The rock which has given rise to these Pre-Cambrian 
igneous rocks may be termed the Houghton magma. From it have been 
produced ilmenite-diopside-diorite, ilmenite-diopside-syenite, ilmenite-sphene- 
actinolite-pegmatites, and ilmenite-felspar-quartz pegmatites with ilmenite 
quartz-veins. 

The rocks of this Houghton magma are traversed by veins of " yatalite," 
a pegmatite formed of uralitic actinolite (after diopside) albite containing 
microcUne, titaniferous magnetite, sphene and quartz. The actinolite is in 
large subidimorphic paramorphs after diopside. Gneissic normal granite 
pegmatite is associated with the " yatalite." 

At Olary, a highly- titaniferous uranium-bearing mineral, davidite, occurs 
in a pegmatite vein, intruding Pre-Cambrian quartzite. 

In addition there are present in this area epi-granites, diopside-diorites, 
granodiorites, hornblende-diorites approaching monzonite, mica-diorite, bio- 
tite-syenite, epi-syenite, and diopside-quartz-syenite with epidote. 

The most typical rock of this series — the diopside-diorite — is interesting 
in view of its high content of soda (5 "34 per cent.), and titanium oxide (3 "ll 
per cent.) 

The magmatic name is tonalose. 

In the Pre-Cambrian rocks of Tasmania, it is a singular fact that as far as 
is at present known, there is an entire absence of any kind of igneous rock 
whatsoever, with the single exception, perhaps, of the garnet-zoisite-amphi- 
bolite, which occurs just above Hamilton, on the left bank of the River Forth 
in the north-west of Tasmania. In Victoria, gneisses intruded by granitic 
rocks occur near the western border of the State, in the county Dundas, as 
well as in Gippsland, in north-eastern Victoria. At Broken Hill, on the 
south-western border of New South Wales, the augen-gneisses are Pre- 
Cambrian. In the Macdonnell Ranges, augen-gneisses traversed by very 
coarse pegmatites, with mica crystals in places up to 2 feet or more in 
diameter, are widely distributed. Large crystals of beryl, and occasionally 
tinstone, are associated with the pegmatite. These rocks are traversed by 
micropegmatites, granulitic pyroxene diorites, diorites, gabbros, dolerites, 
and amphibolites — all are probably Pre-Cambrian. 

Cambrian. 

Perhaps the most extensive lava flows as yet recorded from the Common- 
wealth belong to this system. They are represented at Nullagine, in the 
Pilbara gold-field, where they occur a short distance above the basal gold- 
bearing and diamond-bearing conglomerates. They are partly acid rocks, 
and partly dolerites. In the Kimberley district, there are very large areas 
covered by what is called the great Antrim plateau basalt. At Mount 
Panton, this series of basic lavas and tuffs is capped by beds of somewhat 
phosphatic Salterella limestone. In Northern Territory there is a great series 



304: Federal Handbook. 



of basalts and dacites associated with beds of volcanic tuff and agglomerate, 
the blocks of which are up to 4 feet in diameter. The thickness and fuU 
extent of this vast series and its petrological character is as yet almost wholly- 
unknown, but there is little doubt that it is part of the great Antrim plateau 
group. 

In the account of Cambrian rocks, reference has been made to the Heath- 
cotian series of igneous rocks in Victoria. In the type locality altered basic 
submarine lavas or diabases predominate and are associated with altered 
submarine diabase tuffs, schalsteins, agglomerates, and minor diorite intru- 
sions. 

Interbedded with the diabases are black cherts, some containing radiolaria 
and at any rate in part derived by metasomatic alteration of diabase ash, 
while the diabase is in places silicified to jasper. At Heathcote, these rocks 
are invaded by micro granite, which may be genetically related to the diabase 
series. Near Heathcote, the diabase at its margin passes into " selwynite," 
a green alteration product containing a green chrome-bearing micaceous 
mineral, chromite, pyroxene, together with corundum. Corundum also 
occurs with chromite in the serpentine area, near Mount WelUngton in North 
Gippsland, which is pre-Upper Ordovician, and may be Heathcotian in age. 
The quarries on Mount William, north of Lancefield, from which the aborigines 
manufactured tomahawks, occur in a similar diabase with interbedded black 
cherts and cherty shales, containing protospongia and radiolaria. Similar 
associations of diabase and cherts occur at Mount Major, near Dookie, and 
at Mount Stavely, while serpentinous diabase occurs at the Hum- 
mocks, north of Casterton, in Western Victoria. The whole assemblage of 
these Heathcotian series is strongly suggestive of a spiUte suite, but chemical 
analyses of the rocks are not yet available. In Tasmania, probable equiva- 
lents of the Heathcotian volcanic series of Victoria are developed at North 
Dundas, Zeehan, the Leven gorge, etc., in the north-west and west of the 
island. These are known as the porphyroid series, and consist of dynamically 
altered quartz and felspar porphyries, amygdaloidal diabase (spilite ?), breccias 
tuffs, and tufaceous slates, together with intrusive syenites and granites. 

Ordovician. 

Igneous rocks possibly of this age have been described in South Australia 
from the Blinman mining field as melaph}Tes, oUvine-diabase, granuhtic- 
diabase, gabbro-diabase. These are perhaps related to the dykes of amphi- 
boiite with scapolitised felspar from the New Era mine, near Woodside. In 
Victoria, if the Heathcotian series is of Cambrian age, there are no 
known igneous rocks of Ordovician age. Basic agglomerates from Mount 
Arrowsmith, in New South Wales may also be Ordovician. At the Lynd- 
huxst gold-field, near Mandurama, in New South Wales, there is an immense 
development of contemporaneous basic tuff in the Upper Ordovician black 
cherty graptolitic and radiolarian rocks. In the same state, at Cadia, near 
Orange, two sheets of andesite lava, 30 feet thick, interbedded in the upper 
Ordovician graptolite slates give evidence of contemporaneous volcanic 
activity. They are associated with a deposit of iron ore, estimated to contain 
about 40,000,000 tons of ore. At Forest Reefs, near Orange, this group of lavas 
and tuffs attains a great thickness. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 305 

Silurian. 
In Victoria no definite evidence of contemporaneous igneous rocks of 
Silurian age has yet been forthcoming. It is possible that the alkali granites 
of Victoria, which as far as is known intrude the Ordovician and older rocks 
but not the Silurian series, may be of Silurian age. 

Devonian. 
Lower Devonian. 
In Victoria there occurs a wonderful development of igneous rocks, which 
have been referred to this period. It was a time of great earth movement in 
Victoria, when the older Palaeozoic rocks were much folded, and it is probable 
that the intrusion and extrusion of igneous magma accompanied the move- 
ment of folding while the gold deposits appear also to be genetically related 
to the igneous intrusions and the gold quartz veins filled fissures which 
resulted from the folding movements or igneous invasions. Volcanic, dyke, 
and plutonic rocks are abundantly represented. 

The Volcanic i^oc^-s.— These include the following series : — 

The Snowy River Porphyries. — These are acid lavas, mostly rhyoUtes 
and tufis, in places over 2,000 feet in thickness. They were erupted 
from a chain of volcanoes, perhaps comparable to the Andes, and 
situated on a probable hue of fissure trending nearly north and south 
through Eastern Victoria, near and along the Snowy River. Their 
worn-down stumps are now preserved in mountains like the Cobberas, 
Wombargo, Mount Hotham, etc., while the granite porphyries of 
Mount Taylor, Mount Alfred, etc., near Bairnsdale may represent 
the plugs of some of the volcanoes of this series. Probably of 
similar age are the rocks of Noyang, on the Tambo River, in Eastern 
Gippsland. These include intrusive as well as volcanic types, and 
consist of quartz porphyrites and quartz granophyrites. These 
rocks show a great preponderance of soda over potash and may 
be described as ceratophyres and quartz-ceratophyres 
The Dacite, Quartz-porphyrite Series. — This series is developed in Central 
Victoria from sporadic centres. Fragmental rocks are scarce, except 
in the Lilydale district, and no volcanic necks have been located. 
The rocks consist of thousands of feet of rocks, mainly volcanic, 
but probably in part intrusive. The chief areas are Mount 
Macedon, the Dandenong Hills, Healesville, and Warburton. 
the Cerberean Range, the northern part of the Strathbogies, and 
near Whitfield, in Delatite. At Mount Macedon, the Dandenongs, 
Healesville, and Warburton, the rocks consist of hypersthene-biotite 
dacites, biotite dacites, and quartz-porphyrites. In the Strath- 
bogies and in Delatite, garnet accompanies the quartz porphyrites, 
and here they are overlain by Lower Carboniferous sandstones. 
Probably the most complete sequence occurs near Lilydale, where 
fragmental rocks are abundant, and the earlier eruptions consisted 
of alkali dacites or toscanites, with about 7 per cent, of alkalies 
equally divided between potash and soda, quartz porphyrites 
followed, and the volcanic activity concluded with the eruption of 
normal hypersthene biotite dacites. 



306 Federal Handbook. 



Hypabyssal Rocks. — Many of the granites and grano-diorites have 
marginal apophyses of quartz porphyry, pegmatites, etc., penetrating 
the invaded sediments. Of more economic importance are the altered 
tvpes of dykes, some of which carry gold-quartz veins which have 
proved highlv auriferous. Among these are the propyitised horn- 
blende porphyrite of Woods Point and Gaffney's Creek, and the 
sericitic quartz-porphpy of the Diamond Creek mine, near Mel- 
bourne. The periodotites of Aberfeldy, the cupriferous 
hornblende amphibolites of the Thomson River, and the horn- 
blende picrite of Sheep Station creek, near Omeo, may belong to 
this period. 
Plutonic Rocks. — ^As stated in the stratigraphical part, the alkali granites, 
so far as is known, do not penetrate Silurian rocks, and may be of 
Silurian age, but there are petrographic grounds for associating 
them with the grano-diorites and adamellites, many of which are 
Post Silurian, and some of which, possibly all, are Pre-Lower Car- 
boniferous. 
The alkali granites, in which orthoclase predominates over plagioclase 
and potash generally over soda, include the masses of Mount 
Buffalo, Cape Woolamai, Gabo Island, and certain masses near 
Geelong, such as the You Yangs, the Dog Rocks, and an area near 
Ceres. 
Certain diabases or epidiorites occur at Ceres and the Dog Rocks, which 
were formerly referred to theHeathcotian, but since they are probably 
genetically related to the alkali granites of these areas are now 
included with them in this place. Adamellites are known to occur 
near Violet Town and Nillahcootie, in north-eastern Victoria ; at 
Trawool, Ingliston, north of Bacchus Marsh, and at Broadmeadows, 
near Melbourne. 
The grano-diorite masses, with which many of the gold-fields appear 
to be genetically related are represented among other areas by the 
big mass south of Bendigo, including Harcourt, from which the rock 
is quarried for building stone, by an area near Pyalong, Bulla, 
Macedon, south of Mount Dandenong, and south of Warburton. 
In the three latter areas the grano-diorite is genetically related to 
the dacites, but is intrusive into them. 
In New South Wales in the type district for Silurian rocks, that of Yass, 
dacitic tuffs containing contemporaneous corals and siliceous sponges are 
developed on a large scale. Individual beds aggregate several hundreds 
of feet in thickness. They are intruded by sills of porphyrite and granodiorite. 
Again, at Jenolan Caves, there is a considerable development of basic and 
intermediate tuffs with lavas, immediately underlying the Pentamenis lime- 
stone in which the caves are situated. Corals and crinoids are scattered 
through these tufEs. Most of these Hmestones of Jenolan, Yass, etc., repre- 
sent old fringing coral reefs, and it is clear that these grew partly over banks 
of volcanic tuff and lava, The granites of the southern tableland of New 
South Wales, like that of Cooma, which are Post Ordovician and Pre-Devonian, 
probably belong here, as do the miarolitic granites of Parkes, which are 
Post Ordovician, and capped by Devonian rocks. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 307 

Middle Devonian. 

In the Buchaii series of Victoria there is a considerable development of 
felsite lavas called felsitic tufis and breccias, which pass upwards into the 
Buchan limestone series. These vary from 750 up to 1,000 feet in thickness. 
Diabases and andesites also occur. In New South Wales, in radiolarian rocks 
of this age, there is a great thickness of tuff now proved to be of spilitic origin, 
like the piUow-lava of the British Isles. These Tamworth rocks also contain 
basic spilites. The whole series, including some marine beds of coral reef 
hmestone, is estimated to be about 9,000 feet in thickness. 

Upper Devonian. 

In Victoria, at Mount Wellington, a great thickness, up to 2,000 feet, of 
acid lavas, rhyolites, and quartz-porphyrites, extend north-westward towards 
Mansfield. These lavas are proved to be probably Upper Devonian by the 
presence of the fossil Lepidodendron australe. Melaphyres, quite subordinate 
in importance to the rhyolites, are also met with in this series. 

In New South Wales, rhyolites and basalts of this age occur at Yalwal. 

Devonian Plutonic. 

In Tasmania large masses of serpentine and granite were intruded, perhaps 
in Devonian time. 

The serpentine is generally a peripheral mantle of serpentinised gabbroid 
and ultrabasic rocks surrounding the granite masses on the west coast. 
Occasionally between the granite and serpentine is an aureole of actinolitic 
rock. There is the clearest evidence that the ultra-basic rock consolidated 
before the granite. 

This granite, unlike that of the porphyroid series, is uncrushed. 

This granite is mostly tin-bearing. A remarkable feature about the 
serpentine is that it not only contains nickel and osmiridian, but, at Dundas, 
has tin ores associated with it. 

Carboniferous. 

In Victoria, the granodiorites and granodiorite-porphyrites of Mount 
WiUiam, in the Grampians, have recently been shown to be intrusions into 
the Grampians sandstones. In addition, sills, dykes, and possibly lava flows 
of quartz porphyry occur in the sandstone. These igneous rocks there are 
post Lower Carboniferous in age, and include the youngest series of plutonic 
rocks known in Victoria. Possibly the quartz-porphyries of Grangeburn, 
near Hamilton, and other localities in Western Victoria, may belong to the 
same period of intrusion. 

In New South Wales there is a wonderful development of lavas and tufl's, 
all through this massive system which aggregates at least 20,000 feet in thick- 
ness. Its upper portion is formed very largely of rhyolite lavas and coarse 
acid tuffs, passing in places into hypersthene andesite. Immense sills of 
quartz-porphyry intersect this bedded series. Beds of arkose-like tuffs of 
great thickness, which at first sight appear to be granite but which are really 
acid tuffs, contribute considerably to the thickness of the system. It would 
appear that acid eruptions were in ])r()gress on a very grand scale in New 
South Wales during this period. Mount Spiriby, the highest point of Mount 



308 Federal Handbook. 



Capoompeta in New England, is formed of rhyolite of this age. The andesites 
and rhyolites of the Drake gold-field are possibly Carboniferous, but may 
belong to the base of the Permo-Carboniferous system. In Queensland, 
lavas of the nature of amygdaloidal dolerites and agglomerates, in places 
containing metallic copper and carbonate of copper in the steam holes, are 
interstratified with sedimentary rocks at Mount Toussaint, in the Bowen 
coal-field. 

Plutonic. 

In New England, the immense belt of serpentine which stretches in a 
nearly continuous belt for fully 150 miles from Bingara to Nundle, is either 
of very late Devonian, or of Carboniferous age, and forms a mantle curving 
sympathetically with the huge intrusive batholiths and sills of granite of 
the New England tableland. On the eastern margins of the New England 
granites are large outlying masses of serpentine, on the Manning, Hastings, 
and Clarence Rivers. There is clear evidence here, as in Tasmania, that the 
granite has consolidated within a discontinuous ring of serpentine. In New 
England, there are three varieties of granite belonging perhaps to this period, 
the oldest being a bluish-grey biotite-hornblende-pyroxene granite-porphyry. 
This occurs perhaps as a huge sill : it was followed by widespread intrusions 
of sphene granite, full of dark, basic segregations. This in turn was intruded, 
probably in Permo-Carboniferous time, by an acid granite, containing up 
to 80 per cent, of SiOg. The silica percentage in this group ranges from 
about 65 to 80. Most of the granites of Queensland may belong to this 
period. 

Permo-Carboniferous (Permian). 

Plutonic and Hypabyssal. 

The intrusion of the acid granites, as already stated, had taken place 
in Permo-Carboniferous time. Possibly some of the Queensland tin-bearing 
granites belong to this age, as well as the diorite dykes which have intruded 
the Lower Permo-Carboniferous rocks of the Gympie gold-field, also in Queens- 
land. 

Volcanic. 

In New South Wales, the great coal basin which separates the New England 
massif from the Bathurst-Monaro massif was the scene of eruptions of lavas 
and tufis in Permo-Carboniferous time. At Harper's Hill, 7 miles west of 
West Maitland, coarse andesite tufis and agglomerates are interstratified in 
the Lower Marine Series, and hyperstheneandesite, as well as natrolite basalt 
with datolite are intercalated in the upper part of this series below the horizon 
of the Greta coal measures. 

An important group of alkaline eruptives occurs in the Cambewarra- 
Kiama districts, to the south of Sydney. This is partly contemporaneous 
with the top of the Upper Marine Series (shells of Cleobis grandis and Chenomya 
occurring abundantly in the basal tuffs, and partly with the Bulli coal 
measures. The series of lavas and tuffs, about 1,000 feet thick, shows the 
following sequence, the oldest being mentioned first : — orthoclase-basalts, 
or latites, the total alkalies ranging up to over 9 per cent., of which from 2 per 
cent, to nearly 5 per cent, are potash. These lavas range in composition 



Geolo&y of the Commonwealth. 309 

from shoshonose to mouzonose, having points of resemblance to the rocks 
of the Yellowstone region, United States of America, the trachydolerites in 
part, and also being comparable with the "Ciminites" and " Vulsinites " of 
Italy. These earlier eruptions of alkaline, not very basic rocks, were asso- 
ciated with sills of monzonite, and possibly as the result of progressive dif- 
ferentiation) produced later, perhaps in Triassic time, peralkaline rocks like 
nepheline-syenite and tinguaite, as sills (the alkalies being 10 per cent, to 
15 per cent.) on the one hand, and monchiquite dykes (alkalies under 4 per 
cent.) on the other. Both these types intrude the Permo-Carboniferous and 
Triassic rocks, and may be related to the Mittagong Post-Triassic Series, to 
be described later. 

Still later basalts were erupted of a much less alkaline type. At Mur- 
rurundi, in New South Wales, there were extensive eruptions of basic tuff and 
lavas near the horizon probably of the Newcastle coal measures, the latter 
containing much chert formed by the alteration of powdered felspar and 
volcanic glass. 

Triassic. 

Volcanic. — In New South Wales there is a considerable development of 
more or less fine volcanic tuff in the lower division of the Trias, known as the 
Narrabeen stage. These tufis are distinctly basic in character, and like the 
lavas of the Permo-Carboniferous, contain metallic copper. Through re- 
distribution in water the tuffs have passed into the characteristic chocolate 
shale, so well seen at Long Reef and Narrabeen, etc., to the north of Manly. 

Jurassic. 

At Brisbane there is a considerable development of coarse rhyolite tufi, 
in the heart of the city itself, as at the Leichhardt quarries. Fossil trees 
completely carbonized are found embedded in the tufi. The tufis are followed 
by basic lavas. It is as yet uncertain whether the Brisbane tufis belong to 
the Trias or to the Jura system. To the south of Brisbane, in the direction of 
Mount Flinders and the Macpherson Ranges, trachytes are interbedded in 
the Jurassic rocks and are associated with TcBniopteris daintreei. 

In Victoria, the Jurassic rocks were penetrated in a bore to a depth of 
over 3,000 feet, 60 miles easterly from Melbourne. The Jurassic strata, 
chiefly felspathic sandstones, are uniform in character over the state and 
have been shown to contain abundant fragments of undecomposed felspar, 
presumably of tufaceous origin. The source of all this tuff has not yet been 
discovered. 

Jurassic (?) (possibly Triassic). 

Tasmania. — Rocks of foyaitic magma are represented by the Port Cygnet 
series. These rocks are considered to be perhaps of Lower Mesozoic age. 

At Regatta Point, Port Cygnet, the following occur : — Augite syenite, poor 
in quartz ; nepheline syenite, essexite, jacupirangite facies of nepheliiie 
syenite, melanite-hauy-syenite porphyry, garnet-bearing mica solvsbergitc, 
tinguaite, garnet tinguaite porphyry, ncphelinite, etc. These rocks are all 
strongly intrusive into the Permo-Carboniferous series, but their relations 
to the Jurassic sedimentary rocks and to the diabase have not yet been clearly 
demonstrated. 



310 Federal Handbook. 



Hypahyssal. — The close of Jurassic time was marked by one of the most 
wonderful manifestations of eruptive force of which we have evidence any- 
where in the Commonwealth. The vast sills of dolerite, partly hiinne- 
diabase, that is an enstatite-augite diabase, partly konga-diabase, the latter 
containing normal pyroxene and granophyric intergrowths, probably may 
be referred here. These rocks have disrupted the Jurassic strata of Tasmania 
on a grand scale, and as individual sills are in some cases fully 500 
feet in thickness and of immense lateral extent, portions of the Jurassic 
sandstones overlying them must have floated on this heavy magma like 
icebergs in a polar sea. As already suggested, these intrusions may 
have accompanied the breaking in of the big land bridges of Gondwana Land, 
which formerly joined Australia to India, South Africa, South America, and 
Antarctica. 

Cretaceous. — No volcanic rocks of this age are known anvwhere in the 
Commonwealth, with perhaps the single exception of the so-called Desert 
sandstones, like those of Port Mackay, in Queensland. It has been stated 
that part of these sandstones is built up of trachytic tuff. 

Caixozoic. 

A great variety of volcanic rocks belong to this era, especially in Eastern 
Australia and Tasmania. In lower Cainozoic time there were extensive out- 
flows of basalts and eruptions of basic tuff. These are spoken of by the Vic- 
torian geologists as the older basalts. Probably the older basalts of New 
South Wales, and perhaps Queensland belong to this series. It is doubtful 
whether the series is represented either in South Australia, Tasmania, or 
Western Australia. In Victoria, where they have been most fully described 
they are developed at Melbourne itself at Royal Park, Essendon, Broad- 
meadows, and Keilor, where they occur underneath the lower Cainozoic fos- 
siliferous sediments. They occur also near Geelong, as at Curlewis, at French 
Island and Phillip Island. At Cape Schanck, a bore penetrated them for 
over 800 feet, while at Flinders another bore was discontinued after passing 
through no less than 1,300 ft. of older basalt. They are widespread in south- 
east Gippsland, as at Buln Buln, Leongatha, Neerim, Mirboo, etc., while in 
north Gippsland they cap the plateau sometimes at elevations of 5,000 feet 
as at Mount Feathertop and Dargo high plains. Their chemical composi- 
tion, so far as is known is normal, but occasionally crystals of anorthoclase 
are present. In texture, they range from tachylyte to coarse dolerites and 
their decomposition provides rich soils. In the fresh state they are quarried 
in places for road metal. Although in part apparently sub-marine, they do 
not, as far as is yet observed show affinities with the spilites. In New South 
Wales, there is a considerable development of older basalts overlying leaf 
beds first considered to be of Eocene age, though later there have been adduced 
strong reasons for considering that these leaf beds may be of somewhat newer 
age. They are typically developed in the New England district of New 
South Wales, where for the most part they consist of reddish decomposed 
amygdaloidal basic lavas, passing in places into dense columnar basalts. 
Frequently these New England lavas are capped by beds of laterite passing 
into bauxite and in places into pisolitic iron ore. These laterites mostly 
represent basalt tuffs. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 311 

Middle Cainozoic. 

This is a most remarkable group of volcanic rocks which, in eastern Aus- 
tralia and Tasmania, is distinctly of alkali characters. Rocks of this age 
and character extend at intervals from Casterton and Coleraine in western 
Victoria, through Mount Macedon and Omeo. In New South Wales they are 
met at Bowral, the Canobolas, Warrumbungle Mountains, Nandewar Ranges, 
the MacPherson Ranges. In Queensland they trend through Mount Flinders, 
the Fassifern districts. East Moreton, Wide Bay, the Glass House mountains. 
Mount Larcombe, Yeppoon to Clermont and Springsure, in North Queens- 
land. The total distance over which they have been traced is over 1,200 
miles. 

Victoria. — In the Western District anorthoclase-aegirine-trachytes occur 
in a number of areas, including the neighbourhood of Carapook, Coleraine, 
Mount Koroite, Koolomert, and " the Giant Rock," at Wotong Vale. The 
hills of Adam and Eve, near Coleraine consist of anorthoclase olivine basalt 
traversed by a trachyte dyke, but at Mount Koroite and at Koolomert, the 
basic lavas appear to rest upon the trachytes. 

The Mount Macedon alkali province in Central Victoria has been more 
closely studied than any similar area in Australia. Fragmental rocks are 
practically absent and the lava flows and intrusives were poured out over or 
intruded into a Palaeozoic complex of Ordovician sediments, and Devonian 
dacites and grano-diorites. The sequence from below upwards appears to 
be as follows :■ — ^Anorthoclase aegirine trachyte, volcanic plugs or mamelons 
of solvsbergite, anorthoclase basalt and two new rock types, macedonite and 
woodendite, followed by anorthoclase-olivine trachyte, olivine anorthoclase 
trachyte and limburgite, the volcanic history of the area terminating with 
the pouring out of calcic newer basalts of probably Pleistocene age. The 
new types, macedonite and woodendite, present similarities to the orthoclase 
basalts, and closer resemblance to the mugearites. They contain alkali 
felspars associated with biotite and olivine, and have a high content of phos- 
phorus and titanium. 

Possibly the monchiquite dykes which come up the axes of the anticlines 
in the mining fields of Bendigo and Castlemaine, etc., may be genetically 
related to these alkali rocks. 

In north-eastern Victoria alkali rocks probably of similar age to those of 
Mount Macedon, occur near Mansfield, Omeo, and Mount Leinster, in Beiiambra. 

About 15 miles north-east from Mansfield, in the Tolmie highlands, 
Gallows Hill has recently been shown to consist of a volcanic hill with lava 
flows of nepheline phonolite. At Barwite, east of Mansfield, a similar nepheline 
phonolite appears to occur as a dyke, but its field relations have not yet been 
studied. 

At Frenchman's Hill, just north of Omeo, a volcanic hill with central 
core of solvsbergite has on its flanks flows of anorthoclase trachyte, and a 
more or less radial sy.stem of dykes, including pi^gmatites, quartz veins, 
bostonites, diabase, trachytes, and nepheline phonolite. They have been 
described as of Paltoozoic age, but are almost certainly Cainozoic. The phono- 
lites of Omeo, Gallows Hill, and Barwite are the only ones as yet known in 
Victoria. 



312 Federal Handbook. 



In Benambra at Mount Leinster, another volcanic hill includes solvsbergites 
anorthoclase trachytes, and interesting dyke rocks, some allied to variolite,' 
and as in the case of Frenchman's Hill, this series has been regarded as of 
Palaeozoic age, but is probably Oainozoic. 

In the Mittagong-Bowral district of New South Wales, there is an impor- 
tant suite of eruptive alkaline rocks, all of which are intrusive into the Triassic 
sediments. They are chiefly developed at Glib Rock, and Mount Jellore 
respectively, 2,830 feet, and 2,734 feet high, both of which represent pro- 
bably the denuded plugs of old volcanoes or dome eruptions, probably the 
latter. The sequence has been as follows : the oldest rocks being mentioned 
first : — ■ 

1. Alkaline rocks of intermediate composition — -{a) Syenite, allied to 

bostonite, magmatic name boxanolose, containing iduorspar and 
occasional hydro-carbons, in addition to orthoclase, arfvedsonite 
aegirine, magnetite and ilmenite ; (6) iEgirine-arfvedsonite-quartz 
trachytes. The total alkalies in the above two rocks range from 
10 per cent, to 12 per cent. 

2. Basic sub-alkaline rocks, with 46 per cent. SiOz, total alkalies 

about 5 per cent. These rocks are essexites, with primary analcite . 

3. Basic rocks — ■ 

(a) Basalts and dolerites, SiOg, 43 per cent., alkalies 3 per cent. 

(b) Picrites SiOo, 40 per cent, alkalies 2 per cent. 

Next on the western side of the Blue Mountains there lies a series of very 
perfect laccolites in the form of dome -shaped hills, like Mount Stormy and 
others, which are formed largely of nepheline, aegirine, a little anorthoclase, 
and a considerable amount of analcite. These have been described as syenitic 
tinguaites. Still further west, in the locality of the Canobolas, near Orange, 
there is a great development of alkaline lavas and tufis, extending in a general 
northerly direction to the Warrumbungle Mountains, between Dubbo and 
Coonabarabran, and thence trending in a north by east direction into the 
Nandewar Ranges. From thence at intervals, the alkaline volcanic belt 
can be traced further into the McPherson Ranges dividing Queensland from 
New South Wales, through the Mount Flinders and Fassifern districts to 
East Moreton and Wide Bay ; thence the belt trends northerly through the 
Glass House Mountains, near Maryborough. Still further north it has been 
identified at Mount Larcombe to the south of Rockhampton, as well as in the 
hills at Yeppoon, to the north-east of Rockhampton. Though this immense 
belt has been proved to extend in a north and south direction for a distance 
of about 800 miles, the belt is characterized physiographically by a number 
of dome-shaped or cylindrical hills, in many cases over 4,000 feet high, and 
very abrupt, marking the sites of old volcanic necks. In the Warrumbungle 
Mountains, at Wantialable Creek, the alkaline trachytic tufis are inter- 
stratified with diatomaceous earths, the latter containing fossil leaves. 
These tufis are formed of snow white, often perfect, crystals, of anorthoclase- 
f elspar. The frequent association of diatom aceous earth with these volcanic 
rocks suggests a causal connexion. Meteoric waters, \vith their temperature 
raised through contact with heated volcanic rocks, and therefore capable of 
dissolving a relatively large amount of silica, together with the water of hot 
springs, probably favour the development locally of the diatoms. The 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 313 

usual sequence seems to have been first, leucocratic trachytes (sometimes 
preceded by rhyolites) commencing with riebeckite arfvedsonite comendites 
passing upwards into pantellarites, followed by solvsbergites, phonolitic 
trachytes, and melanocratic trachytes. These are followed by alkaline 
andesites, and these in turn by basalts, either olivine basalts or olivine 
fayalite-melilite basalts. The sequence in most cases has been from acid to 
basic. 

These volcanic rocks are associated ^^■ith intrusive hvpabyssal rocks of 
the nature of porphyrite, tonalite monzonite, soda andesite, etc. The whole 
group shows Eastern Australia to be an alkaline and titanium-rich petro- 
graphical province. 

The raelilite fayalite basalts and tufis (aluoites), which break through the 
konga-diabase at One-Tree Point, Hobart, and the melilite-eudialite basalts 
of Shannon Tier, and the nepheline basanites of Table Cape, Tasmania, 
are perhaps to be grouped here. Their occurrence recalls that of the 
alnoites which have intruded the diabase of South Africa. Perhaps to 
the closing phases of these alkaline eruptions belong the leucite lavas of 
Byrock, Capitan, Harden, and Lake Cudjellico, the essexites of Prospect, 
near Parramatta, the nepheline basalts of Capertee, Mount Royal, etc., in 
New South Wales, the nepheline basalts of Mount Beardmore, and the 
leucite-basalts of the Normanby Reefs in the Cooktown district in 
Queensland. 

It is possible, however, that the above lavas are Newer Cainozoic. 

Newer Catnozoic to Recent Newer Basalts. 

These rocks form physiographically very extensive plains, stretching 
from Mount G-ambier in South Australia, through the western district of 
Victoria to Melbourne, in several places, as in the Loddon Valley, running 
long distances to the north of the main divide. These basalt plains are 
diversified by hundreds of small volcanic cones or " puys," in various stages 
of preservation or dissection, and probably the most recent cone is the com- 
pound one of Tower Hill, west of Warrnambool. Much of the lava forming 
the plains probably proceeded from fissures now concealed beneath the 
lava flows. In places shallow broad depressions of the lava surface have led 
to the formation of extensive lakes over these plains, while in places the present 
streams have trenched deep and son\etimos wide valleys through them. 
The rocks are mainly normal calcic olivine basalts, but in places, as at Ballarat 
and Melbourne, occasionally contain a few crystals of anorthoclase, while 
analcite has been recorded from a coarse type of olivine-augite dolerite or 
essexite, occurring as boulders in the tuffs at the base of the volcanic series 
at Lake Bullenmerri, near Camperdown. The eruptions appear to be con- 
nected with extensive movements of subsidence and of faulting which affected 
Victoria at intervals from post Pliocene to recent times, and in some places 
the sequence of rocks was first tuffs, then lava flows, while the later volcanic 
cones, many with perfectly pr(!served craters, consist mainly of scoria and 
tuffs. The texture of the basalts varies from coarse dolerites, through finer 
varieties to the glassy form — tachylyte, such as is found at the Lai Lai Falls 
and the Merri Creek, near Melbourne. The; rock is extensively quarried 
as a building stone, and constitutes tlie road metal of M(>lbourne 

C.12154. X 



314 Federal Handbook. 



and many other localities. These newer basalts in Victoria frequently 
sealed up old river valleys, the deep leads which contained rich deposits 
of gold-bearing sands and gravels, as at Ballarat, Ararat, and the Loddon 
Valley. 

In South Australia, Mount Gambler, Mount Reid, Mount Leah, etc., 
represent recent olivine basalt cones and craters. The basalt flows of Kan- 
garoo Island probably belong here, as may those of Buubury, in the south- 
eastern part of Western Australia. Probably most of the basalts of Northern 
Tasmania, including at Sheffield the tachylytic variety, belong here. In 
New South Wales, the newer basalts are widely distributed and in places 
form the cappings of deep leads. Basalts are abundant in the New England 
district, and on the border of Queensland occur at Tweed Heads. In Queens- 
land, there are some nearly perfect craters, enclosing crater lakes, pr,eserved 
on the flanks of the Bellenden-Ker Ranges. From their perfect state of 
preservation, it is probable that they too belong to a late stage of newer 
basalt series. , 

In Papua, basalts and agglomerates, some 3,000 feet in thickness, overlie 
a peneplain cut out of the highly-folded Pliocene Port Moresby beds. Mount 
Victory, in British Papua, over 6,000 feet high, is the only lava producing 
volcano at present known within the territory of the Commonwealth. This 
has not yet been explored. 

10. Metamorphic Rocks. 

By Prof. T. W. Edgeworth David, C.M.G., D.Sc, F.R.S., and Prof. Ernest 
W. Skeats, D.Sc, A.R.C.S., F.G.S. 

Contact Metamorphism. — Apart from the normal developments of hornfels, 
andalusite mica schist, cordierite mica rocks, etc., where granitic rocks have 
invaded shales, rocks such as garnet-rock, wollastonite rock, epidote rock 
occur at the contact, chiefly between acid eruptives and limestones, and 
ophicalcites where the latter have been intruded by ultrabasic pyroxene rocks 
belonging to the peridototes or picrites. Contact metamorphic rocks of 
special interest occur at the Mount Bischofi tin mine in the north-west part 
of Tasmania. There a quartz-porphyry, which has broken through slaty 
rocks, probably of Ordovician age, has had the whole of its felspar converted 
by pneumatolysis into fibrous radial topaz (pycnite). The rock at the same 
time has been tourmalinised, ^vith a development in places in a massive form 
of tourmaline veins and irregular lumps, of the dark-green ferriferous variety 
zeuxite. An interesting type of contact alteration is produced by the in- 
trusion of granodiorite into dacite, near Selby, in the Dandenong hills, at 
Warburton, and Mount Macedon, in Victoria. The dacite becomes slightly 
schistose. Hj^ersthene is converted into secondary biotite, ilmenite reacting 
with felspar forms fringes of secondary biotite, the ground mass is re -crystal- 
lized on a larger scale and some secondary blue tourmaline is developed. 
Near Selby, local development of crystalline biotite gneisses from the hypers- 
thene dacite occur near the granodiorite contact. In this case it is possible 
that dynamic metamorphism reinforced the contact effects. Adinoles have 
been recorded amongst the cherts in the Ileathcotian series of Victoria, but 
the analysis suggests that they do not vary much from the normal cherts in 



Geology of the Commonwealth. " 316 

spite of the fact that their association with albite-diabase flows, schalsteins, 
tufis, and radiolarian rocks suggests a local development of the spilite suite, 
with which adinolcs are often associated. 

Bynamic Metmnorfhism- — -Under this heading may be included the 
phyllites and the crystalline schists. 

Phyllites. — -Argillaceous sediments altered to phyllites occur in the districts 
of Kosciusko J Cooma, and Cobar, in New South Wales, and in Victoria are 
represented near Yackandandah, and in several other localities in the meta- 
morphic belt of north-eastern Victoria, and in Dundas in western Victoria. 
The precise age of many of these rocks is undetermined, but some have 
been referred to the Pre -Cambrian Series. 

Crystalline Schists. — -Very little work has as yet been done in the way of 
classifying these rocks on the principles of Grubenmann. There is here an 
enormous field for research, more than a third of Australia, including large parts 
of Western and South Australia, western New South Wales, and areas in 
western and eastern Victoria, and a large portion of Tasmania being formed 
of these rocks. Rocks of Grubenmann's upper, middle, and lower (deep) zone 
are well represented. Typical of the upper zones are chloritoid schist, talc 
schist, chlorite schist, talc schist, the schistose amphibolites and serpentinized 
areas of the Broken Hall area in New South Wales, the epidiorite, the glauco- 
phane rock and glaucophane-epidote rock, albite-chlorite-sillimanite schist 
of Leahy's Creek, in the D'Aguilar Range area, north of Brisbane, in Queens- 
land ; the sericitic quartzites, magnetitic quartzite, conglomerates, talcose 
slates, and epi-magnetite slates of Northern Territory, the Algonkian (?) 
quartz-schists of Tasmania, and crushed quartzite conglomerates of Goat 
Island, near Ulverstone, in Tasmania, muscovite scliists, quartz schists, 
chlorite schists of the Mount Lofty to Murray Bridge region to the east of 
Adelaide, chlorite, ampliibolite graphite schists, siliceous mylonites (ribbon 
jasper), and crush conglomerates of felspar porphyry of Kalgoorlie, in Western 
Australia. 

Amongst rocks which characterize the middle zone are the staurolite 
gneisses, staurolite mica schists, zoisite schists, and tremolite schists of the 
Broken Hill area, the tremolite schists, actinolite schists, muscovite -biotite 
schists, andalusite schists, and " paringite "* schists of the Mount Lofty to 
Murray Bridge area, the muscovite and biotite schists of western and north- 
eastern Victoria ; the muscovite -biotite schists, garnet-zoisite amphibolite 
rock of Forth River, Tasmania ; cyanite-rutile granulite, epidote-actinolite 
topaz schist, anthophyllite schist from D'Aguilar Range area, Queensland. 

Possibly to this middle group may be referred the remarkable sapphire 
schists of Mount Painter. At Mount Painter, 300 miles north-west of Broken 
Hill, there occurs a rock formed of corundum, often as sapphire, cordierite 
sillim^uiite, pleonaste, magnetite, and abundant apatite, monazite and 
tourmaline. 

These schists are traversed by a)i immense lode containing radio-active 
minerals such as autunite, torbernite, monazite radio-active fluorspar, etc. 
To the lowest or middle zone may belong the epidote-cordierite-chlorite 

* A moderately coarse friable silvery muscovite-biotitc schist with very wavy lamination, and with 
very prominent "knots" or "eyes" of impure andalusite, which may be upwards of an inch in 
diameter. 

X 2 



316 ' Federal Handbook. 



schist, the oyanite-rutile granulite, the granulitic mica schist, and the musco- 
vite granulite of the D'Aguilar Range area, and the muscovite-sillimanite 
chiastolite schist, with andalusite schist, of the Mount Lofty to Murray 
Bridge area. 

The following types, perhaps belonging to the deepest zone, have been 
identified in Australia : — Kata-biotite orthoclase gneisses, sillimanite gneiss, 
garnet-sillimauite schist, cordierite-granulite, scapolite-gneiss and plagioclase 
pyroxene rocks, from the Broken Hill area, and scapolite-amphibolite rocks 
and amphibolites, with sphene and vesuvianites from the Mount Lofty 
Ranges, to east of Mount Lofty. The sillimanite schists and gneisses near 
Tallangatta, and elsewhere in north-eastern Victoria, may belong here. 

The following metamorphic rocks seem of special interest : — 

(1) The mylonized granophyric quartz- dole rites of Western Australia, 
passing at one end of the series by introduction of silica and for- 
mation of haematite into red ribbon jaspers and haematite schists, 
and at the other end, as the result of the introduction of plutonic 
carbon, as methane, etc., passing into graphite schists, as at the 
Great Boulder mine at Boulder, adjacent to Kalgoorlie, where 
methane is still being given off in the deep levels of the mine, at 
2,000 feet below the surface. The ribbon jaspers and haematite 
schists can be traced for fully a thousand miles, at intervals from 
the extreme south to the extreme north of AVestern Australia. 
Where quartz reefs traverse these metamorphosed mylonized rocks 
they are generally gold-bearing. 

(2) The remarkable belt of sapphire schists adjacent to the great 
ra,dium-bearing lode of Mount Painter. 

(3) The glaucophane schists of Mount Mee in the D'Aguilar Range area 
of Queensland, to the north of Brisbane. 

(4) The important belt of the Broken Hill area, with its sillimanite 
gneiss, scapolite gneiss, pyroxene -am phibole rocks, etc., charac- 
teristic of Grubenmann's deepest zone. 

(5) The wonderful chiastolite belt of Bimbowrie to the west of Broken 
Hill. These chiastolites, often 5 to 6 inches in length, and over 
an inch in diameter, have in some cases suffered paramorphism, 
and pass into aggregates of pinite, with occasional grains of corundum. 
The important " paringite " belt of Mount Lofty may also belong 
to this horizon. 

1 1. Papua. 

New Guinea, 1,500 miles long, with an extreme width of 380 miles, and 
an area of 306,000 square miles, is one of the biggest islands in the world. 

Apart from Polar regions, perhaps, no portion of the world has been so 
little explored, and yet it probably yields to no other part in scientific interest. 
If it were possible to travel from the coast inland in a bee line for from 30 to 
100 miles,* one could pass from the dense, steaming, tropical atmosphere of 
the lowlands, with its rattan-tangled jungles and bright scarlet creepers to the 
bracing air of the open forest glades, where the pink rhododendron forms a 

* So dense is the growth of the jungle that it took the Goodenough-Rawling expedition no less 
than five weelis to travel inland five miles. 



Geology op the Commonwealth. 



317 




318 



Federal Handbook. 







Geology of the Commonwealth. 



319 



11 


V, 














}J 


H 


<n 


<• 


<!l 


Q 


P 


i^ 




>a 



.2; ? 



c <»3 o 



■8 tj ., 
peg 

I ^^ 

II £ ^ 
-J: «, H 






5 _?'» S, 



5 ^ 
^ .6 






^5 



V3 'w 



§§^ 




c 


>>, 


> 


» 


^ 

N 




"CD 



^ 


S5 


^ 


1^ 


^ 


.2^^ 




>o a 


^ 


«! 



1^ 



5 S 



•o 


<3 




t^ 


^ 


(i 


if 


'« 


1 


1 












--, 






^ 




^'i 


Q 


^ 


^ 



§^ 




ueijQu/ej-auj- fscy //e ^iqeqoj^ 



320 Federal Handbook. 



glowing fringe to the sombre mantle of pine and cypress which clothes the 
higher slopes. In British New G-uinea, one may climb above the tree line 
to the Alpine grasses and flowers, and extinct glacial lakes of the great horst, 
where, even in midsummer, in early morning the grass and wild strawberries 
are white with frost, and all the shallow pools are crusted with ice. Higher 
still, bare peaks and pinnacles of dark schists pierce the clouds. Among their 
sharp serrated ridges and spurs the mountain torrents gather for their leap 
down steep ravines into the valleys far below. In Dutch New Guinea there 
are even perennial snows and glaciers in the Nassau and Orange Ranges, the 
latter reached in 1905 by Dr. Lorentz and his comrades. 

The association in New G-uinea of Dendrolagus and Prcechidna with the 
cloven-footed Sus papuensis, of eucalyptus and casuurina with the oak and 
rhododendron, are typical of that commingling of Indo-Malayan with Aus- 
tralian forms which makes New Guinea so happy a hunting ground for the 
botanist and zoologist. The aborigines, including the pygmies, with their 
primitive pile dwellings recall the lake dwellers of Europe, and present a most 
fascinating study for the anthropologist. Geologically as well as biologically 
New Guinea shows a commingling of Oriental with Australian elements. 

Papua tectonically and palfeontologically is an oriental element in the 
Australian region. It is part of the Himalayan- Burmese arc, prolonged 
through the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, Java, and Timor.* It is specially 
linked up with the Burmese arc by the great oil belt lately found in Dutch 
New Guinea and British New Guinea. The limestones, so rich in Orhitoides 
(Lepidocyclina), recently discovered at Bootless Inlet, to the east of Port 
Moresby, are probably of Lower Miocene age, and appear to be close to the 
horizon of the Papuan oil belt. Its trend lines are contiauous with those of 
the Malay Peninsula ; and the direction and age of the folding, extending 
as it does into late Pliocene time, agree with those of the Burmese arc. In 
Australia, on the other hand, the latest strong orogenic movements, though 
prolonged in places into the Lower Permo-Carboniferous age, ceased for the 
most part in Carboniferous time. The trend of the main folds in New Guinea 
is in a west to east direction from the Charles Louis Range and Mount Leonard 
Darwin to the north-west end of the Finisterre Mountains. Thence the trend 
is nearly south-east, to near Mount Suckling, and thence to the Louisiade 
Archipelago east-south-east. A probable virgation of the main trend line 
is indicated by the great promontory of New Guinea, opposite New Pomerania, 
and by the long axis of that island. 

This strongly marked Burmese trend line is crossed by minor trend lines, 
subordinate folds and faults, more or less meridional, coming from Australia. 
These manifest themselves where the strong faults at the north-east end of 
Axnhem Land, running north by east, pass over into Frederick Henry Island, 
and also in the faults and small cross folds inland from the Gulf of Papua, 
in the neighbourhood of Port Moresby, and at Ware (Teste) Island, etc. On 
the Purari River there is evidence of minor overthrust faults with the over- 
thrusting coming from west-south-west, as well as of the dominant north-west 
to south-east trend lines. On the whole, evidence up to the present suggests 
that the overfolding of New Guinea has been directed in the western half of 

• The Timor trend line marljs a N.E. trend of the arc of new folded rocks bending away from its 
E.W. direction owing to the resistance set up by the great crystalline massif of Darwin and Arnhem 
Landj whose trend lines are directed to the N.W. or N. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 321 

the island from north to south, and in the eastern half, from north-east to 
south-west. In other words. New G-uinea has been overfolded towards 
Australia. 

The physiographic geology of New Guinea is unique. The backbone of 
New Guinea appears to be a horst mostly part of an old peneplain. This, 
from the south-east extremity of the island as far as to, and including, the 
Finisterre mountains is formed of crystalline scliists and gneisses, probably 
Pre-Cambrian. At some spot, not yet explored, to west of the Finisterre 
mountains, and between them and Mount Wilhelmina Peak (15,420 feet), 
the divide is formed of Cretaceous Alveolina limestone. Further west, and 
south of Carstensz Top and Mount Leonard Darwin, Rawlings has described 
perhaps the most stupendous precipice known anywhere in the world, recalling 
the fractures of the lunar Apennines. He estimates its height at 10,500 feet, 
and considers that it is of tectonic origin. The precipice faces the south, 
and is no doubt evidence of a powerful inthrow in that direction. Possibly 
folding has contributed to this gigantic displacement, but to what extent, if at 
all, is not at present known, but from the evidence further east, on the Purari 
Eiver, it may be inferred that the disturbance is in part, at any rate, due to 
folding. 

On the northern slopes of Moimt Suckling, at an altitude of 8,000 feet, 
an immense sheer clifE of quartz schist faces the north-east, and perhaps 
indicates a downthrow in that direction. 

The nearly uniform height of the main Divide in the eastern part of the 
island, rising to from 11,000 to 13,000 feet above sea level, as well as the 
profile of the ranges, strongly suggests an old peneplain, which has been 
block-faulted and subsequently deeply dissected- 

Tliis peneplain has been carved partly out of Pre-Cambrian schists, partly 
out of Devonian, Upper Oolitic and Cretaceous rocks. As the Cretaceous 
transgression probably covered nearly the whole of the island, the peneplain 
composed partly of steeply dipping Cretaceous rocks must obviously be 
Post Cretaceous, though it is possible that the schist portion of the peneplain 
belongs to a Pre-Cretaceous peneplain re-discovered in Post Cretaceous 
time. 

The coastal region and foot hills inland from the Gulf of Papua for a 
distance of 50 or 60 miles belongs to a second peneplain, carved out of Miocene 
to Pliocene estuarine and marine strata. The Miocene transgression was 
far less extensive than the Cretaceous, and the Pliocene less extensive than 
the Miocene. Even the Pliocene beds (Port Moresby beds) have been intensely 
folded, and these folded rocks have, subsequently been reduced to the level 
of this second peneplain. This lower peneplain has been covered in Post 
Pliocene time partly Avith basalitc and andesitic tuffs and lavas to a depth of 
from 1,000 to 2,000 feet. A recent transgression has carried horizontally 
bedded coral reefs over the top of some of the Post Tertiary volcanic rocks, 
while in other places the coral rock rests directly on the Pliocene beds. These 
recent coral-reef limestones are now found up to altitud(!S of 1,000 feet, and 
exceptionally up to 2,000 feet, above sea level, on the south-castsido of Papua. 
This proves that a negative movement of the strand line of the ordiu' of 1,000 
to 2,000 feet took place in south-eastern New Guinea in recent geological 
time. 



322 Federal Handbook. 



This recent emergence of the land has been the cause of modern 
canyon cutting like that of the canyon of the Laloki Eiver, near Port 
Moresby. 

Another alternative explanation of the physiographic geology is that the 
whole country fi-om sea to sea, up to the top of the divide, belongs to one and 
the same peneplain, which has been heavily block-faulted in late Pliocene 
or even Pleistocene time. 

Against this interpretation may be adduced the facts — (1) that so far 
no rocks newer than Cretaceous have been encountered in the region of the 
divide or anywhere above a level of about 4,000 feet. (2) The main divide 
portion of the peneplain is so deeply dissected that Post Pliocene time alone 
may not have sufficed for the work. 

Probably connected with the lines of block faulting was the manifestation 
of volcanic energy, which produced basaltic lavas and tufis like those of 
Mount Favenc, and built the volcanic cones and craters respectively of Mount 
Dayman, 9,305 feet, and of the active volcano, Mount Victory, about 6,000 
feet high — the only lava producing volcano within the Commonwealth — 
as well as the cones of the solfataric volcanoes of the D'Entrecasteaux Group 
such as that of Dobu, etc. The sharp shocks of earthquake occasionally 
experienced in British Papua obviously have relation to crustal readjustments 
connected with the volcanic zones, or movements along fault planes. That 
New Guinea was not exempt from the great Ice Age of Pleistocene and in 
part Recent time, which affected south-eastern Australia at Mount Kosciusko, 
the highlands of Tasmania, and the cordilleras of New Zealand, 
Patagonia, and Tierra del Fuego, is proved by the evidences of past glacial 
action observed by Dr. Lorentz, below Wilhelmina Peak, extending 
downwards to at least 13,200 feet, where glacial lakes with striated 
rock surfaces were observed. The numerous small lakes and tarns on 
Mount Albert Edward and Mount Victoria, both of which are over 13,000 
feet high, make it nearly certain that these peaks were also at one time 
glaciated. 

One of the latest phases in the evolution of the Papuan landscape has 
been the reclamation of shallow portions of the continental shelf by river 
deltas. This is specially to be noticed in the Gulf of Papua, where vast 
amounts of silt are washed into the sea annually by the Fly, Kikori, and other 
rivers. 

The sequence and character of the formations represented are shown on 
the diagrammatic section. This section shows that there is a large area in 
Central Papua as yet mostly unexplored.* 

Little is as yet known of the crystalline schists and gneisses, which form 
the backbone of most of the island, beyond the fact that quartz mica-schists, 
talc schists, and chlorite schists are represented. These are intruded in 
places by granites, diorites, and gabbros. Gold-bearing quartz-reefs are 
associated with these intrusive rocks, and copper deposits are developed 

• Not only is the geological structure unknown, but even the zoology has been only very partially 
studied, as is evident from the following facts : — It has been recorded by Mr. C. G. W. Monckton that 
near the lakes of Mount Albert Edward he observed, at over 12,000 feet above sea level, footprints of an 
unknown animal with cloven hoof, the footprints measuring about four inches by four and a half inches 
— the imprints were quite unlike those of the Sus papuetisis. He adds that the description given by the 
natives of the creature that leaves these footprints suggests an animal like the hog-deer {Sus babirussa) 
of the Indian islands. 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 323 

in connexion witli the gabbros. So far tbe existence of Devonian rock has 
been proved only on the Tauri river, to the east of Piirari river, and 29 
miles from the coast. The Upper Oolites are represented by calcareous shales, 
75 miles up the Strickland river, above its confluence with the Fly river. 
These contain Stephanoceras blagdeni, S. lamellosum, and an ammonite, of 
A. lingulalus, from the White Jura, together with an Aucella or 
Inoceramus. 

The Cretaceous strata, mostly dark-green calcareous and glauconitic (?) 
sandstones and limestones, contain Alveolina, Orbitolites {Flosculinella Schu.) 
Inoceramus, Gryphcea, Modiola, Aviculopecten, Profocardium, Cidaris, Belem- 
nites, etc. 

The oil belt, without doubt a continuation of the Burmese oil belt, is part 
of a vast delta or estuarine deposit, consisting of freshwater beds alternating 
with marine limestones. The limestone of Bootless Inlet to the east of Port 
Moresby, formed chiefly of beautiful shells of Orhitoides {Lepidocyclina), 
probably belongs to the oil belt. 

In places the Miocene limestones are formed chiefly of Globigerina, 
like the well-known Globigerina limestone of Noumea. Some of 
the friable sandstones are extremely rich in mollusca, of which 32 
genera have been identified by Mr. W. S. Dun and Mr. C. Hedley, 
the latter being of the opinion that the greater proportion are species new 
to science. 

Seams of brown coal occur at intervals, the thickest seam so far proved 
being 2 feet 9 inches. The brown coals from British Papua have approximately 
the following composition : — 

Hygroscopic moisture . . . . 13 per cent, to 21 per cent. 



37 „ „ 42 

34 „ „ 41 

3 „ „ 9 

3 „ „ 2 



Volatile hydrocarbon . . 
Fixed carbon . . 
Ash 

Sulphur 

The whole series has been strongly folded along E.S.E. to W.N.W. lines 
or north-west to south-east lines, crossed by north and south lines. 

The oil is associated with anticlinal arches in a bluish-grey mudstone 
and clayey sandstone, in which it occurs as yellowish-brown globules. This 
is found in the neighbourhood of the Vailala and Purari Rivers, a short dis- 
tance above their mouths, to the west of Port Moresby. 

Crude petroleum oil collected by Mr. J. E. Carne, F.G.S., was 
analysed by Mr. J. C. H. Mingaye, F.C.S., with the f()lk)wing 
results : — 

p. in 100 parts. Sp Gr. 

Petroleum spirit below 150° C . . Nil 

Burning oils distilled below 300° C. . . . . 20-8 0*9283 

Intermediate and lubricating oils willi solid 74 '2 0*9733 

hydrocarbons 

Coke .. .. .. .. .. 5*0 

100 



324 Federal Handbook. 



Grains 
per gallon. 


p. in 

100 parts. 


842-60 


12-038 


424-62 


6-066 


Nil 


Nil 



That the petroleum spirit had evaporated from these superficial strata 
as the result of weathering is proved by the fact that light volatile oils have 
lately been obtained in a bore 300 feet deep on the west side of the Vailala 
River near its mouth. 

The water associated with the rock oil was found to have the following 
composition : — 

Total solid matter (dried at 220° F.) 
Chlorine as chlorides 
Sulphur trioxide as sulphates 

The solid matter was chiefly sodium chloride with some sodium carbonate, 
magnesium carbonates, silica, etc. Calcium carbonate, 9-64 grains per 
gallon; magnesium carbonate, 1*60 grains per gallon; silica, 1-80 grains 
per gallon. A strong reaction was obtained for the presence of iodine and 
boric acid in the water. It is thought possible that this iodine water may 
later prove of value for the extraction of iodine from it, like that of Golnosk 
Soerabaia Island, Java. 

Port Moresby Beds. — These strata, radiolarian in places, and marked by 
large onion-like concretions of chalcedony up to several feet in diameter, are 
as strongly folded, mostly overfolded, as are the lower Cambrian rocks of 
the Mount Lofty Range, near Adelaide, and yet these Port Moresby beds 
are probably not older than Pliocene. Thus the orogenic movements which 
have produced the cordillera of Papua must have been acute down to as late 
in geological time as the Pliocene period. 

Post Pliocene. — These are largely composed of volcanic rocks. The 
volcanic rocks of this age in British Papua have as yet been very little studied. 
They are known to consist of hornblende andesites and basalts. In the 
island of Misima (St. Aigan) are thin flows of trachyte. The Papuan lavas 
appear to belong to two volcanic zones as shown on the section, in which 
the Aird Hills (about 200 miles north-west from Port Moresby) belong to 
the southern zone facing Torres Strait and the Arafura Sea, and the other 
parallel and adjacent to the northern coast of British Papua. The great 
extinct crater of the unexplored volcano. Dayman, 9,305 feet high, belongs 
to the northern belt, as does Mount Victory, 6,000 feet high, which still 
produces lava. 

That incandescent lava is present in the crater of Mount Victory is proved 
by the fact that Mr. A. Gibb Maitland observed on two occasions that the 
steam clouds hovering over that mountain were seen, after nightfall, to be 
brilliantly illuminated. 

Mount Victory, as far as is known, is the only lava-producing volcano 
in the territory of the Commonwealth. It has never been geologically examined. 
The small island of Dobu (Goulvain) in the D'Enti-ecasteaux Group is a 
volcanic cone, from which steam is still emitted. This is also situated on 
the northern volcanic belt. In regard to the broad tectonic features of Papua 
it may be suggested, very tentatively, that the mainland of Australia has 
functioned as a " forland massif," Torres Strait, the G-ulf of Carpentaria, 
the Arafura Sea, and the deep Mesozoic and Tertiary basins, with their thick 
strata as a senkungsfeld. Possibly the crystalline schists forming a great part 



Geology of the Commonwealth. 325 

of the backbone of the island have played the part of an inner, or " riick-land 
massif," which has helped to roll up the Mesozoic and Tertiary sediments. 
The chief fracture zones, on which the present active volcanoes of Mount 
Victory and Dobu are situated, appear to lie on the inner limb of the fold 
region, just the portions which have been put in tension as the result of 
the southerly creep of the Papuan area towards Australia.* 

The latest crust movements have caused an emergence of the land to 
the amount of 1,000 feet on the northern coast, and over 2,000 feet on the 
southern coast in Post Pliocene time. 

* If this interpretation is correct their situation would be analogous to that of the Vesuvian volcanic 
zone in regard to the folds of the Apennines, the lavas of Hungary in reference to the folds of the 
Carpathians, the lavas of the Great Basin region of the United States of America in regard to the folds 
of the Roclcies and Sierra Nevada, etc. 



326 



Federal Handbook. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



ASTRONOMY AND GEODESY IN AUSTRALIA. 

By Pietro Baracchi, F.R.A.S., Government Astronomer of Victoria. 



SYNOPSIS. 



1. Astronomy. 

astronomicaii woek 

Attstralia — • 



DONE IN 



{a) By Navigators, Surveyors 
AND Explorers, for Geo- 
graphical PUEPOSES. 

(b) By the Permanent Govern 

MENT Observatories. 

(c) By Amateur Astronomers. 



(d) By Australian Expeditions 

ON Special Astronomical 
Occasions. 

(e) For the Determination of 

Australian Longitudes. 
Geodesy. 

(a) Trigonometrical Surveys 

of High Precision. 

(6) Pendulum Observations. 

Appendix A. — List of References. 

Appendix B. — Some Astronomical 

Papers by Australians. 



1. ASTRONOMY. 

(a) Astronomical work done by Navigators, Surveyors, etc., for 
Geographical Purposes. 

Sir Thomas Brisbane laid the foundation of Australian astronomy in 
1821, but the record of astronomical observations made on Australian 
soil commences half a century earlier ; as is well known, Captain Cook 
was selected by the British Admiralty, chiefly for his astronomical 
qualifications, " to conduct his famous expedition to the islands of the 
Pacific for the purpose of observing the transit of Venus of 1769, 
which he successfully accomplished at Otaheite, after which he discovered 
and visited several islands in the Pacific, and eventually re -discovered 
New Zealand on the 6th October, 1769, and observed the transit of 
Mercury on 9th November, at a place on the north-east coast, now called 
Mercury Bay, and sailing north, on 31st March, 1770, he discovered New 
Holland, landed at Botany Bay, and (on 22nd August, 1770) took possession 
of the eastern coast of Australia in the name of Great Britain" (1). * 

In regard to longitudes obtained by lunar distances. Cook wrote " This 
method of finding the longitude at sea can be depended upon to within half 
a degree, ^\^lich is a degree of accuracy more than sufficient for all nautical 
purposes." 

From Captain Cook's astronomical observations made on Australian 
soil in 1770 was derived the first value on record of the longitude of Fort 
Macquarie, Sydney, viz., 151° 11' 32" east of Greenwich, which is almost 
identical with that determined by Flinders 33 years after (151° 11' 49"), 

Captain John Hunter and Lieutenant Bradley determined the longitude 
of Port Jackson by a series of lunar distances, observed between 14th jMarch 
and 28th April, 1788 (Hunter's Historical Journal, pp. 87-88). On 17th 
August, 1788 " we began at this time to take equal altitudes for ascertaining 
the exact rate of the time keeper." 



A list of the authorities referred to in these pages is givea in Appendix A. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 327 

In June, 1792, Captain Hunter, in a letter to the Admiralty said " The 
advantage of being able to ascertain the ship's place in longitude by obser- 
vations of the moon will be ever satisfactory, but more particularly through 
so vast a tract of sea, in which the error of the log may considerably 
accumulate." 

(2) The " first fleet," commanded by Captain Phillip, which brought 
out from Great Britain the colonists who formed the first permanent settle- 
ment upon the Australian continent, arrived at Port Jackson in 1788. 
Colonel Collins tells us, " Among the buildings that were undertaken shortly 
after our arrival must be mentioned an observatory, which was marked 
out on the western point of the cove, to receive the astronomical instruments 
which had been sent out by the Board of Longitude, for the purpose of 
observing the comet which was expected to be seen about the end of this 
year (1788). The construction of this building was placed under the direc- 
tion of Lieutenant Dawes, of the Marines who, having made this branch of 
science his peculiar study, was appointed by the Board of Longitude to 
make astronomical observations in this country." 

The locality where this observatory is built is known as Dawes Point, 
and the structure is still there, though not used for astronomical purposes. 
This may be regarded as the first substantial observatory erected in Australia 
purely in the interests of astronomy. 

The expected comet, however, was not seen, and nothing is known about 
Dawes' astronomical work at this Observatory, except the determination 
of its geographic il co-ordinates, which are latitude 33° 52' 30" S., longitude 
151° 19' 30". A transit instrument was sent to him by Maskelyne, the 
Astronomer Royal, in 1791. 

In regard to this comet, Russell wrote (G) " The comet, for which all 
these preparations were made, was that which had been observed in 1532 
and 1661, and which was generally expected to return about the end of 
1788 or the beginning of 1789. It was one of the twenty-four which Dr. 
Halley had used in his celebrated investigations, in which he proved that 
comets were subject to the then law of gravitation, and like all other astro- 
nomical bodies, revolved about some centre. In 1776, Maskelyne pointed 
out that this comet would be affected by the major planets, and that for 
the investigation of this important matter, it was very desirable that it 
should be observed in the southern hemisphere where it would first be visible ; 
hence the establishment of the Dawes Point Observatory." 

In one of the papers by Captain P. P. King (2) is given, amongst the 
longitude results of several navigators, the value of the longitude found 
by Admiral Don Jose D'Espinosa while at Sydney on the Corbetas Descubierta 
y Atrevida. This value reduced to Fort Macquarie, is shown as lOh. 4m. 51.91s., 
which is within a fraction of a second of time of the latest accepted value, 
and is very probably nearer to tlie true value than that found by any other 
navigator. 

For more than 30 years after Dawes' watches for the comet, the astro- 
nomical record rests entirely on navigators and explorers. 

It was during this period that French expeditions were moving about 
in Australian watiu's, while surveys of tlie coast and explorations iidand 
were being conducted by such nautical men as Bass, Flinders, Murray, and 



328 Federal Handbook. 



King, and tlie first explorers inland — Gregory, Blaxland, Evans, Oxley, 
Cunningham, Frazer, Hum.e, and others. Skilled astronomical observers, 
and even accomplislied astronomers were to be found among these explorers, 
and the sun, the moon, the planets, and the stars were, no doubt, closely 
watched and employed by them for the determination of their geographical 
positions. 

Flinders, who first circumnavigated Australia in 1801 on the Investigator, 
was indeed an enthusiastic and most accurate observer of the heavenly 
bodies. It was he who trained Sir John Franklin, then a midshipman on 
the Investigator, in astronomical work. John Crossley, of Greenwich Obser- 
vatory, was appointed by the Admiralty as the astronomer of the expedition, 
but left the ship at the Cape of Good Hope, to return home invalided, and 
Flinders wrote to the authorities offering to undertake the astronomical 
work himself, with the help of his brother Lieutenant Sam W. Flinders, 
but the Admiralty sent out to him another astronomer — Inman — who 
accompanied Flinders during the latter part of the voyage (3). Inman, 
on his return to England, became Professor of Astronomy, at the Royal 
Naval College of Portsmouth. 

The amount of Flinders' limar observations is remarkable, both for its 
fine quality and its large quantity. His value of the longitude of Fort 
Macquarie (Sydney), "151° IT 49"" east of Greenwich, is probably within 
one mile of the true value which, considering the instruniental limitations 
and the inaccuracy of the limar tables in his day, may well be accepted 
as a result of the highest accuracy attainable at the time. In his Voyage 
to Terra Australia, are given the geographical co-ordinates of many places 
on the south coast of Australia (Vol. I., 1814), App., page 259. 

(2) Lieutenant (afterwards Admiral) P. P. King, son of Governor King, 
arrived at Port Jackson in September, 1817. He had been sent by the 
British Government to complete the surveys of the coast of New South 
"Wales, which, then, extended from South Cape in Tasmania, latitude 43° 39' 
S. to Cape York, 10° 37' S. 

He made four voyages, extending over four years, from 1817 to 1822, 
during which he determined the longitude and latitude of a large number 
of points on the coast. 

The results of the survey were published in his work A Narrative of a 
Survey of the Inter-tropical and Western Coasts of Australia (2 Vols., 8vo., 
London, 1847). 

From 1826 to 1830 he was in command of two ships — Adventure and 
Beagle — conducting surveys on the southern coasts of South America. Shortly 
after, he retired from active service and settled in New South Wales, where for 
the rest of his life he continued to devote himself to scientific work, " during 
his residence at Dunhered, from 1832 to 1839, and at Tahlee, Port Stephens, 
to 1848, kept his observatory in full work with the transit and other instru- 
ments" (2). 

The results of his astronomical work are contained in two papers which 
were printed " at his own private printing press, apparently for private 
distribution, a copy of each of which is in the possession of his family." and 
in another paper, containing the first five years observations at Tahlee, 
which was published in the Tasmanian Journal, No. 6, a copy of which is 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 329 

in the Sydney Observatory, with the remainder of the observations in MSS. 
In one of the two papers first mentioned are recorded " the observed transits 
of the moon and m.oon culminating stars over the meridian of Tahlee, Port 
Stephens, New South Wales, from 184:3 to 1849, and the resulting longitudes 
from them. Also observations of eclipses of the sun and occultations of 
the fixed stars by the moon at the same place." The derived longitude of 
the station is lOh. 8m. lis. 

" The second paper gives a description of the instruments in the obser- 
vatory and the observations for determining the latitude of Tahlee, 1841 to 
1848. These observations were made with an altazimuth. Nearly 300 
separate star observations for latitude are recorded, from which the latitude 
32° 40' 17" 74" is derived. Also a list of about one thousand places for which 
the geographical co-ordinates are given." 

Admiral King published in addition eight papers in the Monthly Notices 
of the Royal Astronomical Society, " Four refer to comets, amongst others 
the great comet of 1843 ; one to an occultation of Jupiter and his Satellites ; 
another to a lunar eclipse ; another to a transit of Mercury ; and the last 
to a solar eclipse" (2). 

Sir James Ross' antarctic expedition arrived at Hobart (Tasmania), 
in August, 1840, in the ships Erebus and Terror. Sir John Franklin was 
then Grovernor of that Colony. 

A vigorous campaign for the acquisition of data in regard to the magnetic 
conditions of the globe was in course at the time, under the influence of 
Gauss and Sabine, and Sir James Ross established a magnetic station at 
Hobart, and also an astronomical observatory, where a transit instrument, 
an altazimuth, and astronomical clocks were permanently mounted. This 
station was placed in charge of Lieutenant Kay. Although terrestrial 
magnetism was the principal object, astronomical observations were syste- 
matically made and continued till 1854. 

An elaborate investigation of the difierence of longitude between Hobart 
and Port Macquarie (Sydney), Parramatta, and Cape of Good Hope, is in- 
cluded in the work of this observatory. 

(b) Astronomical Work done in Australia by the Permanent 
Government Observatories. 

The Parramatta Observatory, though originally a private establishment, 
became the property of the New South Wales Government, and is for this 
reason placed under this heading. 

The Parramatta Observatory. 

In 1821, Major-General Sir Thomas Macdougall Brisbane was 
appointed Governor of the colony of New South Wales. Throughout 
his career as a soldier he had always been devoted to astronomy, 
and as the southern heavens offered him almost a virgin field for 
exploration, he urged the British Government to supply him with means 
for establishing an observatory in the country he was being sent to govern, 
but having failed, he undertook to oarry out the idea at his own cost. 
Accordingly he purchased instruments, books, and appliances, cngiiged 
two assistants, and immediately after their arrival in the colony, in November, 



330 Federal Handbook. 



1821, a site was selected in close vicinity to his official residence at Parramatta, 
upon which a suitable building was quickly erected for the installation of 
the instruments, and by the following April the Parramatta Observatory 
was already in full working order. 

The assistants were Carl Rumker, an accomplished astronomer who later 
became Director of the Hamburg Observatory, and James Dunlop, whose 
great natural abilities, especially mechanical, rendered his services particu- 
larly valuable in a place where no skilled instrument makers were available. 

The instruments (4) " were a transit instrument by Troughton, of 
3f-inch aperture and 64-inch focal length ; a 2-foot mural circle, with tele- 
scope of the same length, by the same maker; a 16-inch repeating circle, 
by Reichenbach ; a 46-inch achromatic telescope, with equatorial motion 
and wire micrometer, by Banks ; a clock, by Hardy, set to sidereal time ; and 
another, by Breguet, showing mean time." Also two other clocks, by Grimaldi 
and Barraud ; a box chronometer, by Dent ; and a pocket chronometer. 

The programme of the Parramatta Observatory was principally the 
determination " of the position of stars down to the eighth magnitude, 
between the zenith of the observatory and the South Pole "(4). 

The regular series of observations was commenced on 2nd May, 1822. 
At first. Sir Thomas Brisbane and his two assistants worked together har- 
moniously and mth great assiduity, but on 16th June, 1823, Rumker left 
the observatory, and from that date till December, 182-5, the greater part 
of the observations were made by Dunlop. 

In December, 1825, Sir Thomas Brisbane returned to England, and 
Dunlop followed him towards the end of the following year, after having 
continued the work at Parramatta Observatory till 2nd March, 1826, and 
completed a series of observations of 621 nebulae and clusters, at his private 
house, with a reflecting telescope, 9 inches aperture and 9-feet focal length 
(2) made by himself (5), and a catalogue of 253 double and triple stars which 
he observed during the same period (5). 

The records of the observations made at Parramatta with the transit 
instrument and the mural circle, from 2nd May, 1822, to 2nd March, 1826, 
were placed in the hands of Mr. Richardson, of the G-reenwich Observatory, 
in 1830 " by order of the Honorable the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, 
who directed him to reduce the observations and construct a catalogue of 
the positions of the stars " the result being the well-known Parramatta 
Catalogue of 7,385 Stars for the Epoch 1825, published in 1835. 

The re-discovery of Encke's comet at its first predicted return may be 
justly regarded as one of the brilliant records in the history of the Parramatta 
Observatory. The comet was re-discovered by Rumker on 2nd June, 1822. 

After the departure of Sir Thomas Brisbane, the observatory was taken 
over by the Colonial Government, on payment of the full cost of its equip- 
ment, to the owner, and placed in charge of Rumker, who became the official 
astronomer, and resumed work in May, 1826, after having, on 15th July, 
1824, discovered a new comet — I 1824 — wliich bears his name (10). 
He made many observations for latitude and longitude, and observations 
of the moon, the planets, and comets. The results are published in the 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 1829, Part III., and in the 
Memoirs of the R.A.S., Vol. III. ; also in Vol. I. of the Monthly Notices. 



Astronomy axd Geodesy. 331 

At the end of the year 1828, he went to Europe, and some time after 
became Director of the Hambxirg Observatory. 

The Parramatta Observatory remained inoperative for nearly three years. 
In 1831, Dunlop returned to Australia, and was appointed Superintendent 
of the Parramatta Observatory, which position he held till 1847. 

Most of the work done by Dunlop during this period still remains un- 
published. It is contained in eight books MSS., which were transferred to 
the present Sydney Observatory (2). 

(7) On 30th September, 1833, Dunlop discovered a comet, and on the 
19th of March, 1831, he independently discovered another, which had been 
first seen by Gambart, at Marseilles, twelve days before (8). 

The observations of these comets are published in Memoirs of the Royal 
Astronomical Society, Vol. 8, page 251 et seq. 

The Catalogue of 629 Southern Nebulae and Clusters, observed by Dunlop, 
in 1828, with a 9-inch reflecting telescope of his own make, as previously 
mentioned, was presented to the Royal Society, and printed in the 
Transactions of 1828, pp. 113 and 152, and the Catalogue of 253 Double 
Stars, observed in the same vear, was published in the Memoirs of the 
R.A.S., Vol. III. 

After Dunlop's resignation, the observatory was dismantled, the instru- 
ments packed and stored, and Australia remained without an astronomical 
observatory for several years. 

In 1880, when the building which had once been the Parramatta 
Observatory was reduced to ruin, fast disappearing, the Government 
was induced to erect a permanent monument to indicate the site of the 
observatory. 

Exactly in the position occupied by the transit instrument, a marble 
obelisk now stands, with the following inscription : — " An Astronomical 
Observatory was founded here ^lay 2nd, 1822, by Sir Thomas Macdougall 
Brisbane, K.C.B., F.R.S., Governor of New South Wales" (6). 

The geographical co-ordinates of this historical point, assigned to it by 
Rumker, are Latitude 33° 48' 50-68", Longitude 101° 4' 6-25" 

Although the admitted imperfections of Sir Thomas Brisbane's astrono- 
mical equipment, and his desire to accumulate data from direct observation 
at very high speed must be recognised as the concurring causes which pre- 
vented a degree of accuracy equal to modern needs to be attained in the 
Parramatta Catalogue — which represents the main results of Sir Thomas 
Brisbane's enterprise — thus reducing to some extent the value of the work 
done by him and his assistants, we must nevertheless regard that enterprise 
with profound admiration and look upon the obelisk now standing on 
the spot where Sir Thomas Brisbane, Rumker, and Dunlop observed 
the stars crossing the meridian of Parramatta, as the monument raised by 
an appreciative generation to commemorate the foundation of Australian 
astronomy. 

The founder of the Parramatta Observatory and its successive directors 
were indeed held in liigh estimation in England. 

The Royal Astronomical Society presented its gold medal to Sir Thomas 
Brisbane and James Dunlop on 8th February, 1828, and to Carl Rumker on 
10th February, 1854. 

C.121.')4. V 



332 Federal Handbook. 



The Sydney Observatory. 

Tliis observatory is situated on one of the headlands projecting into 
the Harbor, on the western side of Sydney Cove, less than half a mile from 
Dawes Point, where Lieutenant Dawes erected the first Australian observa- 
tory, in the year 1788. The locality is now called Flagstafi Hill. 

Through the persistent recommendations of Sir William Denison, Governor 
of New South Wales, soon after his arrival in Australia, on 20th January, 
1855 (6), the Colonial Grovernment voted a sum of £7,000 for the erection 
of an observatory in Sydney, and made provisions for the salary of an 
astronomer and a computer. 

The Reverend W. Scott, M.A., was selected by the Astronomer Royal, 
Sir George Airy, to fill the position of first director of the proposed 
Sydney Observatory. 

The first duty of Mr. Scott after his arrival was, as he relates himself, 
" to fix on a site for the proposed observatory. For purely astronomical 
purposes I should have preferred a position further inland, but as it 
appeared desirable for various reasons that the observatory should be 
in the immediate neighbourhood of Sydney, I could find no spot more 
suitable than that recommended by the Governor on which the observatory 
now stands." 

The building was commenced in May, 1857 and was so far advanced as 
to admit of meridian observations being made in June, 1858." 

The first astronomical equipment of the Sydney Observatory consisted 
of the instruments purchased by the Government from Sir Thomas Brisbane. 
In addition, a complete time-ball apparatus was installed. By means 
of this apparatus the ball on the tower was automatically dropped, at fii'st 
at the instant of local noon, and later at the instant of 1 p.m. It was 
chiefly the practical value of this service which gave the Government 
sufiicient inducement to establish the observatory and, at the same time, 
imposed the essential conditions in the selection of the site. 

The work of the observatory was confined in the first instance to the 
approximate determination of the sidereal and thence the mean time by a 
number of nightly observations of clock stars (9). 

The transit circle by Jones, with which Dunlop had in his later years 
made a few observations at Parramatta, had been sent to England to be 
remodelled and improved by Troughton, and did not arrive back till 
December, 1858. This instrument has an object glass of 3| inches aperture 
and 62 inches focal length. Its circle is 42 inches in diameter, divided to 
every 5 ' and read by four microscopes 90° apart. It was completely set 
up and ready for use in June, 1859. 

Mr. Scott complains that this instrument was not entirely satis- 
factory. He says (9), " The instrumental errors are such that although 
the circle may be regarded for some purposes as an useful instrument yet 
it cannot be classed amongst instruments of the highest order." 

(6) " It was a fortunate circumstance that just then, in October, 1858, 
the great comet of Donati, one of the finest in the century appeared in our 
southern sky," for it served the purpose of drawing the attention of the 
authorities to the want of a suitable instrument at the Official Observatory 
for the observations of the comet and of obtaining from Parliament a sum 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 333. 

of £800 witli wliich an achromatic telescope, 7j-incli apertm-e and 124 inches 
focal length, made by the celebrated firm of Merz and Sod. of Munich, was 
piirchased, which was mounted and ready for use in June, 1861. 

IVIr. Scott remained in office for four years, and resigned his position on 
30th September, 1862. 

The astronomical work done at the Sydney Observatory in Mr. Scott's 
time was fully published by him in the four official volumes issued for the 
years 1859, 1860, 1861, and 1862. These contain the results of upward of 
6,600 meridian observations in both co-ordinates, about 100 transits of 
the moon and moon culminating stars, a large number of observations of 
zenith stars for latitude, and some observation of comets. 

The 7j-inch Merz equatorial was at his disposal only fifteen months, 
dm'ing which some attention was given to double stars. 

Mr. Scott published some of his other astronomical work in the Monthly 
Notices of the R.A.S., Vols. 19, 20, 21, and 22, as follows : — Observations of 
the Solar Eclipse of the Sun, 11th January, 1861; Comet III., 1860; 
Comet II., 1861; Encke's II., 1862; Transit of Mercury N 4, 1861. 

The instrumental faults never permitted i\Ii". Scott to assign to his 
meridian observations a degree of accuracy equal to that of the best 
observatories. 

"It must therefore be borne in mind" he tells us "that determination 
of right ascension with the Sydney transit circle are liable to errors varying 
from 3 '3 to - 4 '2 seconds of arc, or 0*22 to - 0*28 seconds of time for a 
equatorial star." " An examination of the North Polar distances leads 
to a very similar result" (9), 

From September, 1862 to January, 1864, the Observatory was in charge 
of Mr. Hem-y Russell, B.A., who had joined the Observatory as Mr. Scott's 
assistant in 1859. 

Mr. Russell confined his astronomical duties to the time service and to 
the observation of transits of the moon and moon culminating stars. He 
also made a series of micrometric measurements for the comparison of Mars 
with neighbouring stars, at the opposition of 1862. This series, however, 
was not published (6). 

Mr. Greorge Robert Smalley, B.A., succeeded Mr. Scott as the second 
Director of the Sydney Observatory, in 1864, being selected by the Astro- 
nomer Royal — Sir George Airy — at the request of the colonial authorities. 

It seems that the imperfection of the meridian instruments as reported 
by Mr. Scott discouraged Mr. Smalley from undertaking any serious and 
systematic work with them, and he resolved to employ them only for the 
ordinary requirements of the time service. He devoted the rest of his 
time to magnetic and meteorological investigations and to the initiation 
of a trigonometrical survey of the colony, which was then urgently required. 
Eventually the Government intrusted him with that work, and opera- 
tions were commenced in due course for the measurement of a base line 
at the south end of Lake George. 

Difficulties and delays were encountered in these operations and the worry 
" told seriously on Mr. Smalley's health, and during the latter part of 1869 
and all 1870 till his death in July of that year, he was not able to do much 
of the work which he had determined to carry out" (6). 



S34 Federal Handbook. 



The only astronomical work done during these years, in addition to the 
observation of clock stars, were some observations of Comet I., 1864, made 
by Mr. Smalley with the Merz 7J-inch equatorial, and published in the 
Monthly Notices of the R.A.S., Vol. 25, p. 171 ; and observations of Comet I., 
1865, and of Encke's Comet at its return in 1865, which were published in 
Monthly Notices, Vol. 26, p. 63- 

Mr. Eussell succeeded Smalley as third Director of the Sydney 
Observatory and Government Astronomer of the colony of New South 
Wales. 

" Having had a share in all the work done with the meridian circle, and 
knowing its imperfections, he determined to confine the observations with 
it to those required for time and longitude, and at once urged the necessity 
for a new meridian instrument" (6). 

The approaching transit of Venus gave him the opportunity of obtaining 
the s}rmpathy of the Government for the acquisition of more instruments. 

The astronomical operations which figure more prominently in the 
history of the Sydney Observatory during the first seven years of Russell's 
regime are the preparations made for observing the total eclipse of the sun 
in December, 1871, in the extreme north of Australia, and the transit of 
Venus in 1874, of which a brief account will be given in another part of this 
article. 

To the ordinary routine of observations of clock stars were added 
observations of the transit of the moon and moon culminating stars for 
longitude, and the observations of Herschel's Cape Catalogue of Double 
Stars. 

A remarkable feature of this period is the increase of instrumental power 
which Russell, by continuous effort and determination, succeeded in securing 
for his observatory. 

In 1872, with the assistance of the Royal Society of New South Wales, he 
obtained from the Government a sum of £1,000 for instruments, the greater 
part of which he used in procuring an achromatic object glass, 11.4 inches 
aperture, and 12| feet focal length, by Schroeder, of Hamburg, for which he 
designed and had constructed in the colony under his supervision an equa- 
torial mounting provided with all the requisites of a modern instrument. 
This instrument was installed in 1874. 

In the same year the necessity having arisen for the determination of star 
positions with the greatest possible accuracy to serve the purposes of the 
trigonometrical survey of the colony of New South Wales then in course 
a sum of £1,000 was granted by the Government for the purchase of a 
high-class transit circle for the observatory ; Mr. Russell ordered the instru- 
ment from the firm of Troughton and Simms, and procured also a large 
eighteen-prism spectroscope, by Hilger, and other apparatus. 

The new transit circle has an object glass of 6 inches clear aperture and 
85 inches focal length. It has two circles graduated to every 5' read 
by four microscopes ; regular observations with it were commenced in 
February, 1877. 

The instrument was employed for observations of stars required in the 
operations of the trigonometrical survey, and of other stars near the zenith, 
of which it was intended to make a special catalogue. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 335 

" In fact, since 1870, the observatory has been entirely refurnished with 
instruments of the most modern and perfect forms, and, although they are 
not equal in size to some of the giant telescopes which have been recently 
erected in Europe at enormous cost, they are quite equal in quality to those 
in the best European observatories, as is proved by the observations now 
made with them." Thus Russell wrote in 1882 (6). 

An important series of meridian observations of Mars at its opposition 
in 1877 and comparison stars had been obtained by Russell with the 
new transit circle " for the purpose of determining the solar parallax. 
A long series of observations was made which, combined with obser- 
vations made at Washington, gave 8 "885 inches as the value of the solar 
parallax " (6). 

The results of the work done with the transit circle up to the end of the 
year 1881 are published in two volumes, " Sydney Observatory — Astronomical 
results for the years 1877-78 and 1879-1881." These results were used by 
A. Stichtenoth to form a catalogue of 1,543 stars for the epoch 1880, published 
in Veroffentlichungen des Koniglichen Astronomischen Rechen-Instituts 
zu Berlin, No. 20. 

The results of observations on double stars are published in a separate 
volume, Sydney Observatory — Double Star Results, 1871-1881. 

In the first volume of astronomical results is shown a summary of the 
observations of transits of the moon and moon culminating stars made by 
Russell in the years 1863, 1871, 1872, 1873, and 1874, fi>om which is derived 
the value of the longitude of Sydney (according to Russell), lOh, im. 50 "Sis., 
which was adopted till 1883. 

During the eight years after 1881, the same routine of meridian observa- 
tions and observations of double stars were continued. 

The double-star work of the years 1882-1889 was published in Memoirs 
R.A.S., Vol. 50. 

In 1887 j\Ir. Russell went to Europe to attend the Astrophotographic 
Congress at Paris, and on behalf of his Grovernment and the Government of 
the colony of Victoria, pledged the Sydney and Melbourne Observatories to 
undertake a share in the astrophotographic programme which was decided 
upon by that Congress. 

The part of the sky allotted to Sydney ranged from 57° to 61:° of south 
declination, and that of the Melbourne Observatory from declination -65° 
to the South Pole. 

Russell obtained his photographic object glass from Steinheil, of Munich, 
and had the mounting, with all requisite accessories, made in the colony 
on his own design, and under his personal supervision. He had a circular 
wooden observatory detached from the main building, built for the special 
purpose of housing this astrophotographic telescope. 

The mounting of the astrograph was ready in 1890, but the object glass 
did not arrive till later. Russell, in the meantime, mounted a Dallmeyer 
portrait lens 32 inches focal length and 6 inches aperture, and, fi.-dng this 
star camera to the tube of the astrograph, employed it in taking a scries of 
highly successful photographs of the Milky Way. These photographs, 
seventeen in number, accompanied by a description of each, form an album 
which was published in 1890. 



336 Federal Handbook. 



The installation of the new object-glass was completed in 1891, and the 
work reached the end of the preliminary experimental stage in 1892, from 
which time it proceeded regularly in succeeding years till 1898. 

In 1889 powerful street lamps and electric lights were placed in the vicinity 
of the Observatory, the effect of which was to interfere so seriously with the 
work of the astrograph that it became necessary to remove the instrument 
to some better locality. 

Accordingly, the Government, having granted a piece of land for this 
purpose at Pennant Hill, some 11| miles to the north-west of Sydney, and 
615 feet above sea-level, a suitable building was erected, and the instrument 
installed there in 1899, where the astrophotographic work has since been 
carried out by Mr. Short, as a branch of the Sydney Observatory. 

For the last 22 years the determination of the places of reference stars 
to be employed for the reduction of the plates of the Photograpliic Catalogue, 
and actual photographing of the regions comprised in the Sydney zones, 
constituted the greater part, if not the whole, of the astronomical programme 
of the Sydney Observatory, the results of which have not yet appeared. 

During this long period observations of double stars were continued, the 
results of which have been published in various lists in the A.N., Nos. 31.54, 
3240, 3303, 3369, 3423. 

Many other observations of an occasional character were made, and other 
astronomical duties performed, which come within the scope of a national 
observatory, but it would be impracticable to give here a detailed account 
of them. 

Russell, who died in 1907, may be regarded as one of the principal factors 
in the advancement of Australian astronomy during the last half century. 
In estimating the value of his work, it must be remembered that by far the 
greater part of his energies were expended on the development of Australian 
meteorology. 

He was the inventor of no less than 23 instruments, and the contributor 
of some 130 papers to various scientific societies. He was made F.R.A.S. 
in 1871, F.R.S. in 1886, C.M.Gr. in 1891, also, in the same year, Vice-Chancellor 
of the Sydney University, where he graduated in 1858, and President of the 
R. S. of New South Wales for some years. 

After Russell's death, Mr. Alfred Henry Lenehan was appointed Govern- 
ment Astronomer. Under him the astronomical work of the Observatory was 
a continuation of the routine programme of previous years, which he was 
bound to accept and to advance as speedily as he could, under the adminis- 
trative difficulties of the time, till completion might be reached. 

He died on 2nd May, 1908 ; and till August, 1912, Mr. W. E. Raymond 
remained in temporary charge of the institution. 

In August, 1912, Mr. W. E. Cooke, M.A., formerly Director of the Perth 
Observatory, was appointed Government Astronomer of New South Wales, 
and Professor of Astronomy in the Sydney University. 

In his report to the R.A.S., M.N., February, 1913, No. 4, Vol. LXXIII., 
we read — 

" Owdng to the rapid growth of Sydney, the present site of the Observatory 
has become unfit, and the instruments are not suited for the exacting 
requirements of modern astronomy. It has therefore been determined to 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 337 

move the entire institution to a new site, and to provide some new instruments 
and remount others. In particular, a new meridian instrument of modern 
design, suitable for fundamental work of the liighest precision, will be provided 
in accordance with the recommendation of the Paris Astrographic Congress 
of April, 1909. 

" Meanwhile the routine work has been almost stopped for the present, 
and preparations for the reorganization have been commenced." 

The Williamstown Observatory. 

E. L. J. Ellery was appointed, in 1853, by the Government of the Colony 
of Victoria to establish a small observatory at Williamstown, chiefly for the 
purpose of determining time and supplying a daily time signal for the service 
of ship masters. 

On taking up his position, Ellery found the following preliminary arrange- 
ments already made : — 

A time ball apparatus already installed on a tower at Point Gelli- 
brand, with the requisite apparatus and machinery for hoisting 
and dropping the ball. 
Some astronomical instruments, including a transit instrument on 

order in England. 
A site for the Observatory selected. 

A sum of £2,800 voted by Parliament for the erection of a suitable 
building. 
Under these conditions he set to work in a wooden hut, using a 
sextant and a chronometer, and the first time signal was issued in 
August, 1853. 

Such was the beginning of the Williamstown Observatory. 
The geographical position of the place had been determined some years 
previously by Captain Stokes, of H.M.S. Beagle, his values being — 
Latitude 37° 52' 52" S. Longitude 9h. 39m. 42s. E. 
In 1854, the instruments on order in England arrived. They were a 
25-inch transit instrument and a high-class astronomical clock, by Frodsham. 
A more ambitious transit instrument, which had been ordered from the 
firm of Troughton and Simms, arrived in 1855. This was an excellent 
instrument, with an object glass of 3J inches clear aperture and 45 inches 
focal length. 

In 1858, the geodetic survey of the colony was decided upon, and placed 
in charge of the astronomer. The proposed scheme was to divide the country 
for purposes of land settlement by meridians and parallels, the primary lines 
being first located at distances of 1°. 

The Observatory having by this time acquired national importance, 
on account of its public duties in connexion with the geodetic survey 
and time service, the Legislature passed a resolution on 8th December, 1859, 
according to which a Board of Visitors to the Observatory was appointed 
by the Governor in Council on 30th January, 1860, the Governor (Sir Henry 
Barkly) becoming himself chairman of the first Board. 

A new circle arrived in August, 1861. It was constructed by Trough- 
\o\\ and Simms. Its object glass has a clear aperture of 5 inches and a focal 
length of 72 inches. The circle is of gun metal, 4 feet in diameter, divided 



338 Federal Handbook. 



to every 5 minutes, and read by four microscopes attached to one of the 
two stone piers which support the instrument. Observations with this 
instrument commenced in October, 1861. 

A new clock, also by Frodsham, had arrived a year before, and still 
more instruments were acquired in this and in the following year. These 
were a chronographic apparatus, by Siemens and Halske, of Berlin ; an 
Airy zenith sector ; and an achromatic telescope, equatorially mounted. 
This latter instrument, by Troughton and Simms, has an object glass of 
4^ inches clear apertm'e and a focal length of .5 feet ; with it a valuable 
series of observations of Mars at its opposition of 1862 was obtained for 
determining the parallax of the sun in connexion with other observatories. 

In 1853 the site occupied by the Williamstown Observatory seemed 
quite suitable for an observatory, but the rapid growth of the community, 
the construction of a railway terminus and large railway workshops near 
it, had in 1862 rendered its position unfavorable, in consequence of which 
it was decided to remove it to Melbourne. 

Since 1857, there had been in existence a meteorological and magnetical 
observatory, which was established and conducted by Professor George 
Neumayer. This observatory was situated at Flagstafi Hill, at the west 
end of the city of Melbourne. In 1863, Professor Neumayer, having decided to 
leave Australia, it was arranged that bis observatory should be amalgamated 
with the new Astronomical Observatory. 

The building for the new Observatory was commenced in 1861 and com- 
pleted in 1863. 

In June of that year the Williamstown Observatory was dismantled, 
and " the whole of the instruments and appliances removed to the new 
building now known as the Melbourne Observatory " (11). 

The results of the work done at the Williamstown Observatory are pub- 
lished in the volume entitled — Melbourne Observatory. Astronomical 
Results. 1861-62-63. 

This volume contains the Williamstown catalogue of 546 Stars for the 
epoch 1860, which at the time it appeared received warm appreciation from 
European and American astronomers. Also a series of right ascensions 
and north polar distances of the moon, extending from January, 1861, to 
7th October, 1862, upon which rested the longitude of the Williamstown 
Observatory ; and finally, the series of observations of Mars and comparison 
stars during the opposition of the planet of 1862. 

The Melbourne Observatory. 

This Observatory is situated at a distance of 4 miles north-east from 
the site of the old Williamstown Observatory, and about 1 mile south- 
east fi-om the centre of the city of Melbourne, within an enclosure of 
4J acres of land permanently reserved for observatory purposes in the 
Domain Park. 

In addition to the main building, which provided ample accommodation 
for the astronomical instruments of the Williamstown Observatory, special 
structures were erected for the magnetic and meteorological instru- 
ments which were taken over from Professor Neumayer's Flagstaff Hill 
Observatory. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 339 

The Melbourne Observatory was ready to commence work at the end. 
of June. 1863, its astronomical equipment consisting of the instmments 
removed from the former Observator}' at Williamstown. 

for nearly three years the work consisted almost entirely of meridian 
observations of the fixed stars which were employed in the operations of 
the geodetic surveys then in course in Australia and South America. A 
catalogue of these stars was prepared each year and printed in due course. 

In 1862 the Royal Astronomical Society initiated a movement for carry- 
ing out by British effort a southern durchmusterung on the same basis 
and the same scale as that which Argelander was conducting for the northern 
hemisphere. The idea was to obtain the co-operation of the three southern 
observatories — Madras, Cape of Grood Hope, and Melbourne. 

The Melbourne Observatory offered to join in the work, and was eventually 
allotted the zone from 60 degrees to 80 degrees of south declination. 

The undertaking involved the determination of the positions of all the 
stars comprised in this southern belt down to the tenth order of magnitude. 

This work was commenced on 11th April, 1866, and continued for about 
six years, when it had perforce to be discontinued. Its results comprise the 
mean places for the epoch 1875 of 48,672 stars down to the 9th, and in many 
instances the 10th order of magnitude, in the zone from 65 degrees to 69 
degrees of south declination. These places are rouglily arranged in the MS. 
in order of right ascension, the right ascensions being given to the nearest 
tenth of a second of time, and the north polar distances to the nearest 
second of arc, showing that the work aimed at a somewhat higher 
accuracy than that of other works of this class, such as Argelander zones or 
the C.P.D. 

With very little labour the work can be arranged and prepared for printing 
if means be provided for the purpose. 

In the year 1850 a memorial was presented to Lord Russell, the object 
of which was a request to Her Majesty's Grovernment to establish " a powerful 
reflecting telescope (not less than 3-feet apertm'e) in some fitting part of Her 
Majesty's Dominions, and for the appointment of an observer charged with 
the duty of emplopng it in a review of the nebulae of the southern 
hemisphere." 

The opportunity of enhancing the importance of the Observatory by 
the acquisition of a great reflecting telescope was quickly recognised by 
the Board of Visitors, and His Excellency the Governor (Sir Henry Barkly) 
was requested to obtain " an expression of opinion from scientific men in 
England as to the importance of the results to be expected from it, the 
most suitable construction of telescope for the purpose, both as to the 
optical part and the mounting, its probable cost, and the time requisite for 
its completion." 

" An application was made through the Secretary of State for the Colonies 
to the Royal Society of London for their opinion, and the President and 
Council of that body, after a very full consideration and a long correspondence 
with the most eminent practical astronomers of the day, recommended — 
(a) That the telescope be a reflector, with an aperture of not less than 4 feet ; 
(6) That the large mirror be of speculum metal ; (c) That the tube be 
constructed of open work and of metal " (12). 



340 Federal Handbook. 



The instrument was completed in 1868 and was sent to Australia, 
reaching Melbourne in November of that year ; it was ready for work by 
the end of June, 1869, and the observations commenced in August of the 
same year. 

Grubb's 4-feet reflector has, since its installation, been styled " The 
Great Melbourne Telescope." An admirable description of it by the late Dr. 
T. Romney Robinson, D.D., F.R.S., appears in the Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London, 1869, page 127 (13). 

The telescope itself is of the Cassegrainian type, and is mounted equa- 
torially in a somewhat similar form to the Sisson ; " its declination axis 
being placed between the upper and lower pivots of the polar axis, which 
run in large bearings, supported by two distinct massive stone pillars rising 
from a solid bed of masonry. The R.A. circle clamps and slow motion 
apparatus are between the declination axis and the lower pivot. The decli- 
nation circle is fixed to the bearings of the declination axis on the side of 
the polar axis, opposite to that of the telescope " (13). 

The dimensions of the optical parts are as follow : — ^Aperture of primary 
speculum, 48 inches ; focal length of primary speculum, 360 inches ; 
aperture of secondary speculum, 8 inches ; focal length of secondary 
speculum, 74.7 inches; equivalent focal length, 1,994 inches. 

There are two large 4-feet mirrors, each mounted in its cell ready for 
attachment to the telescope, floating on a complicated support of 48 cups 
and balls connected to the ends of arms which form a series of triangular 
levers, and upon hanging rings around its circumference. These mirrors 
have a central circular opening of 8 inches in diameter to admit the passage 
of the cone of rays from the convex secondary mirror to the ocular. The 
mirrors, both primary and secondary, are of speculum metal. 

The tube of the telescope consists of three portions. The lower, or " eye 
end " poi-tion consists of the cell carrying the large speculum ; the central 
portion is a cylinder of ijoiler plate, about 93 inches long, to which is at- 
tached the declination axis by means of a massive cast-iron cradle and strong 
iron bands embracing the cylinder. The speculum cell fits to the end of 
this cylinder on turned surfaces, and is held to it by three strong screw-bolts. 
The upper portion of the telescope tube is made of open steel lattice- work, 
about 20J feet long, fixed by turned flanges to the boiler plate cylinder by 
bolts and nuts. 

The secondary mirror, in its cell, is mounted in the centre of the lattice 
tube, about 300 inches from the surface of the primary speculum and 39 
inches within the object end of the tube, and means are provided to enable 
the observer while at the eye end to alter this distance for focussing. 

The polar axis is 123 inches long, and its two pivots are 12 inches in 
diameter. The declination axis has a diameter of 22 inches at the bearing 
near to the telescope, and 9| inches at the counterpoise end. The circles 
are divided on silver bands, and have a diameter of 30 inches. 

The driving clock is governed by a double conical pendulum of the well- 
known " Grubb " form. The direct driving weight is 260 lbs., and the 
total weight of the moving parts is approximately 18,000 lbs. 

The instrument is provided with an achromatic telescope finder, 4 inches 
aperture, seven negative or Huygenian eye pieces ranging in power from 



Astronomy and Geodesy 341 

234 to 1,000, a parallel wire micrometer, a spectroscope, and a camera for 
photographing telescopic images at the focus of the primary mirror, the 
secondary mirror being removed when the camera is used. 

In 1910, a Voigtlander portrait lens of 6 inches aperture and 40 inches 
focal length, for which a metallic mounting was made at the Observatory, 
was attached to this telescope. 

The great Melbourne telescope was for many years after 1869 employed 
in the revision of the nebulae and clusters which were observed by Sir 
John Herschel at the Cape of Good Hope in the years 1834-38, and the 
results obtained are as satisfactory as the committee of the Royal Society of 
London, on whose recommendation, supervision, and approval the 4-feet 
Cassegrain was constructed, could have expected. 

Most of Sir John Heischel's southern nebulae have been examined, and 
many hundreds of drawings of these objects, with notes and micrometric 
measurements, exist at present in the observer's note books and registers ; 
but there has been no opportunity since 1891 of arranging this material 
for publication. 

In 1871, an expedition to the extreme north of Australia was organized 
for the observation of the total eclipse of the sun in December of that year, 
in which the Melbourne Observatory took part. This expedition is referred 
to in another division of this paper. 

In 1874, the occasion of the transit of Veiius, which occurred in that 
year, gave Ellery the opportunity to add to his observatory equipment a 
photoheliograph, by Dallmeyer, with object glass 4 inches aperture and 
60 inches focal length ; an achromatic telescope, 8 inches aperture, 110 
inches focal length, by Troughton and Simms, mounted equatorially and 
provided with all requisites for micrometric measurements and work of the 
highest precision ; also another equatorial telescope, 4J inches aperture 
and 60 inches focal length, by Cooke and Sons, of York. 

The preparations for observing the transit of Venus included the dis- 
mantling of the east transit telescope of 6j-inch aperture, with which the 
Melbourne zones had been observed till 1872. For this telescope an equa- 
torial mounting was constructed at the Observatory, and the instrument 
has since been used for expeditions as a portable equatorial. 

Two new barrel chronographs were also constructed at the Observatory. 

After the transit of Venus, it became a part of the daily routine to take 
a photograph of the sun in the forenoon, which was done on all available 
opportunities for more than 20 years. 

In the time which elapsed between the two transits of Voiuis of 1871 
and 1882, the routine astronomic;al work of the Observatory did not suffer 
any marked changes or interruptions. 

Stellar photography was tried with the great telescope, l)ut unsuccessful 1 v. 
It was not found practicable to guide the telescope steadily eiu)ugh during 
exposure. Pliotographs of the moon with the great telescope, which only 
required an exposure varying from 1 scfoiid to 3 seconds (with wet plates) 
were, however, successful, and they were even considered at tho time amongst 
the best that had ever been obtained. 

The photographs of the m()f)n obtained at the focus of the primary mirror 
were 31- inches in diameter. 



342 Federal Handbook. 



The pictures of the sun obtained with the photoheliograph were 4 inches 
in diameter. One thousand seven hundred and twelve of these pictures 
on glass were sent to the Greenwich Observatory and the Solar Physics 
Committee in England, for measurement and tabulation (14). 

The preparations for the transit of Venus of 1882 and the observations 
of that astronomical event in this State will be dealt with under another 
heading. 

The determination of the difierence of longitude between Port Darwin 
and Singapore, and between Port Darwin and the Australian observatories, 
which were undertaken in 1883, will also be dealt with separately. 

In the year 1883, a " Central Bureau for the Telegraphic Exchange of 
Astronomical Information " was established at Kiel. It was arranged among 
the principal Observatories that all urgent astronomical intelligence and 
discoveries should be communicated to the Central Bureau at Kiel, which 
would at once transmit the news to various secondary centres to be 
established for the purpose in every part of the world, and thence to all 
astronomers concerned. The Melbourne Observatory was requested to act 
as the secondary centre for Australia, and it has since been its duty to com- 
municate to the other Observatories of Australasia any astronomical news 
cabled from Kiel, and to receive announcements of astronomical discoveries 
or other important astronomical intelligence from any part of Australasia 
for telegraphic transmission to the Central Bureau at Kiel. 

Until August, 1884, all meridian observations were made with the 5-inch 
transit circle, and the results were published in seven volumes, the first of 
which contained the work done at Williamstown as already mentioned. 
The six subsequent volumes contain all the separate results from each obser- 
vation and the annual Catalogues of concluded Right Ascensions and North 
Polar distances for each year. 

The first general Catalogue for the Epoch 1860, containing the positions 
of 546 stars, is that printed in Volume I. A second general Catalogue for 
the Epoch 1870 was prepared and printed in 1874. This contains the 
positions of 1,227 stars. A third general Catalogue for the Epoch 1880, 
containing 1,211 star places was published in 1889. 

In May, 1884, a larger transit circle arrived from England, constructed 
by Troughton and Simms, and is of somewhat similar dimensions and 
design to those constructed by the same firm for the Observatories of 
Cambridge, England, and Harvard College, United States of America. Its 
object glass has an aperture of 8 inches and a focal length of 108 inches. 
Its two circles are 3 feet in diameter, being divided to every 5 feet, 
and each read by four microscopes. 

The two circles are at opposite ends of the axis, which is 52 inches in 
length, and has pivots 4J inches in diameter. The pivot bearings rest on 
two short iron pillars, which stand on massive stone piers. 

The reading microscopes are carried on gun metal circles attached to the 
short iron pillars. 

From August, 1884, to the present time all meridian observations have 
been made almost exclasively with this instrument. 

During the period 1884-1891, the astronomical work of the Observatory 
was similar in character to that of preceding years. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 343 

The meridian observations made with, the new transit circle comprised 
the usual clock stars, a special list of circumpolar stars, which were assiduously- 
observed year after year, stars employed for comparison with comets, stars 
selected by Dr. Auwers for the formation of a " fundamental Catalogue of 
Southern Stars," and others in connexion with the reduction of the Melbourne 
zones and transit of Venus observations ; also a list of stars required by the 
Bureau des Longitudes for insertion in the Connaissance des Temps, and 
another list of stars used by Dr. Gill in some of his heliometer work. 

The observations of the southern nebulae with the great telescope, and 
observations made with the smaller equatorials, comprising extended series 
of observations of all the comets which were visible from Melbourne, and a 
preliminary spectroscopic survey of the southern stars brighter than the 
5th magnitude, form the bulk of the extrameridional work of this period. 
It has been stated in a previous page that the share allotted to the Mel- 
bourne Observatory in the Astrophotographic Programme, which was agreed 
upon at the Paris Congress of 1887, covered the south polar area of the heavens 
limited by the 65th parallel of south declination. 

Some description of the instrument required for this work has been already 
given. The one for this Observatory arrived in Melbourne at the end of 
December, 1890. 

It was constructed by Sir Howard Grubb, of Dublin, and is similar in 
all respects to those constructed by the same makers for the same purpose 
for the Observatories of Greenwich and Cape of Good Hope. 

It consists of a double telescope, movuited equatorially on a massive 
cast-iron stand in what is known as the G-erman model. 

The two telescopes are roughly of the same length, but of different aperture. 
The larger, which is employed for photographing, has an object glass of 
13 inches aperture and 135 J inches focal length, and is corrected for spherical 
and chromatic aberration for rays close to Fraunliofer's spectral line G. 

The smaller telescope is used for guiding the instrument by visual obser- 
vation during exposure. Its object glass is 10.1 inches aperture and 130 
inches focal length. The driving clock is ^vithin the stand, and is controlled 
electrically by a seconds pendulum, the driving being corrected automatically 
by a system of difEerential wheels devised by the maker. 

In September, 1892, a financial depression necessitated a policy of 
retrenchment, and for some years the work of the Observatory was 
hampered by the inability of tlie Government to adequately support it. The 
year before the astronomical work of the Observatory had to be i-educed 
to a minimuui Ellery wrote in his report of 2nd September, 1891 — 

" The work of the year is clearly before us. The Melbourne 
portion of the photographic charting of the heavens, with its collateral 
work, will use up nearly a,Il our a vailabh^ working power. The meridian 
work will largely monopolize the Meridian Observing and Computing 
Staff, while obtaining photographs, developing, and otherwise dealing 
with the plates will take up the whole attention of two or three members 
of the staff both night and day. I propose, therefore, to confine the 
astronomical work, for the present at least, to the routine meridian 
observations, coupled with tlie observations for guide stars, and to 
the special photographic woi-k with the astrograph, undertaking only 
such occasional extra luoridiiin work as may from time to time demand 
attention." 



344 Federal Handbook. 



In 1895 the astronomical strength of the Observatory was further very 
greatly reduced by the retirement of Ellery in June of that year. During 
his tenure of office he had raised the institution from very humble 
beginnings to the rank of a " First Order " Observatory. 

We were left, a band of four, to carry out the meridian and the astro- 
photographic work. This band remained the same till 31st December, 1907, 
after which date a fundamental change took place and a new epoch commenced 
for the Melbourne Observatory. 

The Annual Catalogues of Stars, observed with the 8-inch transit circle 
from August, 1884, to 31st December, 1912, were regularly constructed and 
completely prepared for publication, but have not yet been printed. Those 
of the years 1884-1893 were used for the compilation of the Third Melbourne 
General Catalogue for the epoch 1890 ; the work, which contains 3,100 stars, 
will very shortly be ready for issue. 

The Annual Catalogues from 1894 to 1912 contain, in addition to the 
standard clock and azimuth stars and some 134 zodiacal stars which were 
observed at the request of the Cape Observatory, all the stars which are 
employed as standard reference stars for the reduction of the Melbourne 
plates of the photographic catalogue. 

With these annual catalogues, up to the year 1910, a special catalogue 
of 6,680 standard reference stars for the epoch 1900, all observed at least 
three times, has been prepared. 

The total number of stars of this class required for the full reduction of 
the Melbourne plates is about 9,160, and 2,480 stars are therefore still required 
to complete the Melbourne share of the astrophotographic catalogue. 

Of this number, 636 stars have been observed three times, 379 twice, 
and 496 once, while 969 stars still remain to be observed three times. It is 
estimated that these observations will be completed by the end of 1914, 
after which an additional catalogue for the epoch 1910 will be prepared. 

The series of Melbourne catalogue plates has been completed. A series 
of chart plates, with single exposures of one hour, covering singly the whole 
area around the South Pole down to the 65th parallel of south declination, 
has also been completed. In this series the centres of the plates were set 
at the even degrees of declination. 

Another series of chart plates, with three exposures of thirty minutes 
each, the three images forming a small equilateral triangle Avith sides of 
8 inches has been advanced to the extent of 431 single regions out of 584 
regions comprised in the full Melbourne area. The centres of these triple 
exposure plates were set at the odd degrees of declination from the 65th 
parallel to the Pole. 

For the measurement of the catalogue plates, an arrangement was made 
in 1898, by which both the Sydney and Melbourne plates were to be measured 
at the Melbourne Observatory, at the joint expense of the Governments of 
New South Wales and Victoria ; a Measuring Bureau was created and the 
necessary stafi trained at the Melbourne Observatory for the purpose. 

The regular measurements commenced in 1900, but a satisfactory rate of 
progress was not reached till 1901. 

The computation of plate constants for the Melbourne regions and the 
tabulation of rectilinear co-ordinates for publication are now in course 
of preparation, and a first volume , containing the zones — 65 and — 66, 
is ready for press. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 345 

The total number of stars in this catalogue is over 300,000, and will occupy 
eight quarto volumes of about 300 pages each. 

On the 1st December, 1908, the Government of the Commonwealth of 
Australia took over, and assumed control of, the meteorological services of 
the various States uniting them under a single Commonwealth Department 
of Meteorology, and thus the Australian Observatories were freed from a 
burden which had for a quarter of a century retarded the advancement 
of Australian Astronomy. 

Since the middle of the year 1908 to the present date, the principal parts 
of the working routine programme of the Melbourne Observatory have still 
remained the same as those of previous years, namely, meridian observations 
and astrophotographic operations. 

The meridian observations have been made generally upon the reference 
Stars of the Photographic Catalogue, Southern Stars in Auwers' Fundamental 
Catalogue, Stars selected for investigation of refraction, personal, and magni- 
tude equation, Clock and Azimuth Stars. 

The object of the astrophotographic operations has been to advance a 
second series of catalogue plates and the series of chart plates with triple 
exposure. 

The progress made in the reduction of these observations and in the 
preparation of results for publication has already been stated. 

The record of other classes of astronomical observations and investigations 
undertaken during the period is as follows : — A series of 100 photographs and 
measurements of position of Comet C (1908) Moorhouse ; thirteen photo- 
graphs and some 300 comparisons with stars of Halley's Comet ; observations 
of Comet Borelly {1911e), Gale (1912a), Tuttle (1912&), Faye-Cerully 
(1910e), Kiess (19116); observations of Variable Stars of long period, south 
of declination -30; investigation of the Eeseaux Melbourne No. 6 and 
Melbourne N 23 ; investigation of the division errors of the 8-inch transit 
circle. 

The Adelaide Observatory. 

In 1855, the late Sir Charles (then Mr.) Todd was appointed in Eiigland 
Superintendent of Telegraphs and Astronomical Observer for the Colony of 
South Australia. 

It does not appear that any astronomical work had been done in South 
Australia, except for geographical purposes, before Todd's arrival nor for 
twelve years after it. 

In 1867 the transit instrument of 32--inches aperture and 15 inches focal 
length, which had been originally employed at the Williamstown Observatory, 
was traiLsferred to Adelaide on loan from the Victorian Government, and 
for the purpose of making meridian observations in connexion with 
longitude operations required for establishing the position of the eastern 
boundary of the Colony. It was not until 1874, however, that a suitable 
Observatory and some astronomical equipment were provided by the South 
Australian Government for its astrouoTuer. The prescMit Adi^laide Observa- 
tory was erected in that year. 

The astronomical instruments cojnprised, at first, an astronomical 
clock by Frodsham, the 3^-inches transit instrument borrowed from the 
Victorian Government, and an equatorially-mounted telescope by Cooke and 



346 Federal Handbook. 



Son, 8-inclies aperture, and nearly 10 feet focal length, provided with all 
the requisite accessories of a first-class instrument. The last-named 
instrument was employed for the observations of the phenomena of 
Jupiter's satellites, for the study of surface detail of this planet, and for 
comets. 

Meridian observations were made only for determining local time, a 
time ball placed on a tower at the Semaphore, 9 miles distant, being 
dropped automatically from the Observatory at 1 p.m. daily. The first 
time signal was given on 2nd August, 1875. 

In 1880 a transit circle by Troughton and Simms, with object glass 6-inch 
clear aperture, and 85 inches focal length, was obtained, being similar in 
design to the transit circle of the Sydney Observatory, except that the two 
divided circles at the opposite ends of the axis are larger, their diameter 
being 30 inches. 

" The first work undertaken was the observation of stars in Weisse's 
Catalogue, between 0° and 4° south declination, the intention being to include 
all stars down to the 10th Magnitude, between 0° and 15° south, a work which 
would have occupied several years. Exclusive of clock and azimuth stars, 
we had 4,072 observations in R.A., and 4,099 in N.P.D. of stars in the belt 
(0-4) referred to, by July, 1892" (15). 

This work was then suspended, Todd's attention having been called to 
the discordance in the observations of N.P.D. in the South and North Hemis- 
phere. 

Observations were made, for latitude, of 297 stars near the zenith of 
Adelaide, 118 stars from 1st to 4th magnitude whose zenith distance ranged 
up to 30 degrees north and south, observed either during day or night ; and 
127 circumpolar stars so selected that five or six were observed above and 
as many below the pole, the same stars being observed in the reverse order 
after an interval of six months. 

Later the zenith distances of 300 stars at all altitudes were observed in 
the years 1893 and 1894. 

These were selected from the Greenwich ten-year catalogue 1880. 

180 circumpolar stars were observed for latitude in 1894 and 1895, in 
addition to a small list of 23 stars, of which several bisections were made 
at the same transit and the Nadir taken before and after every observation, 
and another list of 53 stars arranged in three groups — one of stars near the 
zenith, one of stars about 40° south, and one of stars about 40° north of the 
zenith. This latter list was observed at the same time at the Observatories 
of Melbourne and Sydney by arrangement. 

For some years after 1897 the astronomical work of the Observatory 
consisted mainly of meridian observations for time, and occasional observa- 
tions of comets and of Jupiter's satellites. 

The publications of this Observatory have been mainly meteorological, 
consisting of annual volumes, dating from 1876 to 1907 inclusive. Various 
astronomical memoranda, such as observations of Jupiter's surface markings, 
satellite phenomena, eclipses of the sun and moon, etc., are included as 
appendices to these volumes, and some miscellaneous papers have been 
printed in the Monthly Notices of the R.AS. and in Proceedings of the 
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science. 



ASTBONOMY AND GeODESY. 347 

The unpublished work comprises all the meridian observations made 
with the transit circle since the beginning in 1889, and the physical observa- 
tions and drawings of Jupiter, of which a large series was obtained in the 
years 1884 to 1894, together with a set of over 200 drawings, made during 
the same period, and arranged for publication on an orthographic projection. 

Sir Charles Todd retired in December, 1906, and was succeeded by 
R. F. Griffith, who was appointed Acting Government Meteorologist on 
1st January, 1907. He resigned his position at the end of that year to join 
the newly-created Department of Meteorology under the Commonwealth 
Government, and Mr. G. F. Dodwell, B.A., was then placed in charge of the 
Observatory. On 1st June, 1909, Mr. Dodwell was appointed Government 
Astronomer of South Australia. 

The present programme of astronomical work at the Adelaide Observatory 
is as follows : (a) Time determinations ; (6) Observations of reference stars 
of Sydney Astrographic Zones ; (c) Field latitude and longitude deter- 
mination ; {d) (Seismology) variables, double stars, and miscellaneous obser- 
vations with the 8-inch Cooke equatorial. 

The observations of variables and double stars have now been com 
menced by certain members of the local Astronomical Society, the equatorial 
telescope of the Observatory being used for this purpose. 

Negotiations are in progress concerning a proposal to undertake latitude 
variation work in conjunction with the La Plata Observatory. 

The instruments of this Observatory at the present day are those which 
formed the equipment of the Observatory since 1889, namely, the 6-inch 
transit circle and the 8-inch equatorial, the additions being only a portable 
universal instrument, chronometers and other minor apparatus. 

The Adelaide Observatory is supported by the South Australian Govern- 
ment and administered as a branch of the State Department of Education. 

The Perth Observatory, Western Australia. 

This Observatory started its career in 1896 as an astronomical and 
meteorological institution administered as a branch of the Colonial 
Secretary's Department, Mr. W. E. Cooke, M.A., being appointed Director. 

It is situated upon Mt. Eliza — a sand hill some 200 feet above sea 
level, rising from the western boundary of and overlooking the city of Perth — 
and commands an almost uninterrupted view of the horizon on all sides (16). 

Its geographical position is — Latitude, 31° .57' 10-27" South ; Longitude, 
7h. 43m. 21-74 east. 

The climate of the locality is considered very favorable for astronomical 
work, except in February and Maich, and in the winter montlis, when observ- 
ing is more frequently interfered with by smoke, cloud or rain. 

In the first few years of its existence the Observatory was gi-adually pro- 
vided with the following instruments, namely: — An 8-inch reflecting telescope 
intended for use with a coelostat ; a transit circle, by Troughtou and Simms, 
with object glass 6-inch aperture and 71 inches focal length, with two 
divided circles 30 inches in diameter ; a twin astrographic instrument, by 
Sir Howard Grubb, of the standard pattern and size employed by the 
observatories co-operating in the international astrophotogrH])hic programme ; 
two machines for the measurement of astrophotogra]>hic plates, similar to 
C.121.")4. z 



348 Federal Handbook. 



those employed at Greenwich and Oxford; a 12-ineh reflecting telescope; 
a barrel chronograph, with Grubb's " mouse " control ; an astronomical 
clock, by Victor KuUberg, regulated to sidereal time ; a mean-time clock ; 
and two chronometers, a 5-inch theodolite, and minor observatory apparatus, 
accessories, and appliances. 

For some years the astronomical work of the Perth Observatory was 
confined mostly to meridian observations for local time, for the investigation 
of instrumental errors of the transit circle and for the accurate determination 
of its geographical position. 

In the year 1900 the Government of Western Australia was invited to 
carry out the astrophotographic programme originally assigned by the Paris 
Congress of 1887 to the Observatory of Eio Janerio, which, however, had 
not been able to start the work. The invitation was accepted, and the 
photographing of the zones comprised between the parallels of .31 degrees and 
41 degrees of south declination was undertaken by the Perth Observatory. 
This circumstance established the nature of the work upon which the 
transit circle and the astrograph were to be utilized from that time to the 
present. 

The transit circle was to be devoted to the observation of reference stars 
within the Perth photographic zones, and the astrograph to obtain the 
requisite photographs of these zones. 

This work commenced in 1901. At first, owing to the meteorological 
duties of the Observatory, progress was slow, but from the end of 1907, when 
meteorology became a Federal concern, the work advanced vigorously, as 
shown by the extensive publication of its results. 

The character of the task undertaken by observatories participating in 
the international astrophotographic programme has been previously de- 
scribed here in connexion with the Sydney Observatory, and it will be 
sufficient to remark that the Perth zones, ranging from -31° to -41°, contain 
1,376 regions to be photographed, and that about 10,000 reference stars, 
distributed within these zones at the rate of three stars per square degree, 
whose positions had to be accurately determined by transit circle observa- 
tions, were necessary, according to Mr. Cooke, for the preparation of his 
photographic catalogue. 

To these two classes of work the Perth Observatory has practically 
devoted the whole of its energies and resources, and is still continuing on the 
same lines towards the completion of its allotted share. 

The entire area covered by the Perth zones has been photographed, the 
whole series containing 1,376 plates, but Cooke found it desirable to obtain 
another series, in the taking of which improved methods were introduced, 
which gave greater uniformity in the results ; 662 plates of the second series 
have been obtained and passed as satisfactory. 

Three hundred and three plates of the first series, and 294 plates of the 
second series, have been measured. 

In 1907, Professor Dyson, then Astronomer Royal for Scotland, 
offered to assist in the measurement of the Perth plates. His offer was 
gratefully accepted. The first plates sent to Ediiiburgh were those of zone 
- 40 degrees. At present some 400 plates have been measured there and are 
practically completed (16). 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 349 

It is stated by the present Acting Director that the series of plates com- 
prising the Perth section of the photograpliic catalogue will be completed, in 
two or three years. Xone of the plates of the chart series have as yet been 
taken. 

In the transit circle observations of the reference stars, Cooke adopted 
the zone method first introduced by Professor Kustner, of the Bonn Observa- 
tory in the observation of his zone stars. 

The observed positions depend on three steps, namely . — 

1. A fundamental catalogue of a small number of stars. For the 

present purpose Auwer's Fundamental Catalog fur Zonenheohach- 
tungen am Sudhimmel has been used. This contains, on an 
average, about tkree or four stars per hour between the limits 
of -31° and -41° declination. 

2. A catalogue of secondary standards, containing three or four stars 

per hour for every zone of two degrees between the above limits. 
The positions of these stars depend entirely upon those of the 
fundamental catalogue, and about ten observations of each star 
were taken. This catalogue has been published as the first 
volume of Perth observations, under the title of A Catalogue of 
420 Standard Stars, etc. 

3. The stars of this catalogue form the basis for the determination of 

positions of the reference stars, of which four catalogues were 
published, in 1908, 1909, 1910, and 1911. 

The places of 7,561 stars for the epoch 1900 are contained in these cata- 
logues. 

The plan of advancing all the various phases of the photographic catalogue 
as rapidly as possible, by measuring the plates soon after they have been 
taken, and regulating the transit circle observations according to the require- 
ments of the computers for determining plate constants, and thence the final 
preparation of manuscript for the printer, enabled Cooke to commence the 
publication of his section of the work in 1911. Vol. I. of the Astrographic 
Catalogue, 1900, Perth section -31° to -41°, and three other volumes 
bearing the same title, were issued in 1911 and 1912. In these are 
registered the rectilinear co-ordinates of 60,481 stars, in the aggregate, 
resulting from the measurement of 160 plates, which cover a belt round 
the heavens two degrees wide between 31 degrees and 33 degrees of south 
declination. 

The present director estimates that the whole share of the Perth Observa- 
tory in the international astrophotographic work will be fully published by 
the end of the year 1918, so far as the catalogue series is concerned. 

The Qovernment Observatory of Brisbane, Queensland. 

The Astronomical Observatory at Brisbane may be said to have been 
established in the year 1879, when, subsequent to the death of Captain 
O'Reilly, a gentleman who had a private observatory at his home in South 
Brisbane, the Government of Queensland purchased his entire outfit, and 
removed the building to its present location on Wickham Terrace. 

The adopted geographical po.sition is — Latitude, 27° 28' "00" south; 
Longitude, lOh. 12m. 6' 40s. east. 



350 Federal Handbook. 



The various surveyors-general have successively controlled the Observa- 
tory programme of work. This has primarily been governed by the require- 
ments of the Survey Department, and was an integral part of the operations 
of the trigonometrical survey during its existence. The taking of 
observations for time and the supervision of its distribution per medium of 
private lines, time ball, etc., is the only work now performed, and none other 
is projected under present conditions. 

The astronomical equipment is as follows : — 

(1) A portable transit instrument, by Troughton and Simms, of 30 

inches focal length, and 2| inches object glass. 
This instrument has been in use for about 30 years. 

(2) A sidereal clock, by Cochrane, of Brisbane, with Eiefler's pendulum, 

and seconds contact for transmitting clock beats electrically. 

(3) Combination chronograph and Morse telegraph instrument, with 

relay, etc., for recording transits, transmitting and receiving time 
signals. 

(4) A mean time clock, by Kullberg, of London, with seconds and 

hours contacts, also with electro-magnetic attachment for cor- 
recting small errors without touching the clock. 

(5) Sidereal and mean time chronometers. 

(6) Time-ball apparatus. 

For a few years after the establishment of this Observatory the observa- 
tions for time were made by the late Sir Augustus C. Gregory, a versatile 
and ingenious scientist and famous explorer, who having then retired from his 
position of Surveyor- General of Queensland, took up the work as a hobby 
and for this purpose constructed with his own hands a chronograph, relay, 
and all the apparatus necessary for electrically recording the observations, 
including the seconds contact in the sidereal clock. 

Tasmania. 

In conjunction with the chief meteorological station of this State, a 
Government observatory was established at Hobart on a very modest scale 
(reduced indeed to a minimum as an astronomical institution) for the 
purpose of determining local time and supplying the public and the shipping 
at Hobart with a daily time signal. The astronomical equipment consisted 
of a small transit instrument and a time keeper, neither of these being of high 
class workmanship. 

Owing to complaints made by the Admiralty, in regard to the occasional 
uncertainty of the time given by the Hobart Observatory, the Government 
of Tasmania arranged with the Victorian Government for the daily trans- 
mission of a time signal at 1 p.m. fi-om the Melbourne Observatory, which 
has been used since 1911 for dropping the time ball at Hobart, and is repeated 
to other places in that State. 

Thus the State of Tasmania is at present without official astronomy. 

(c) Amateur Astronomy. 

The astronomical work considered under this heading is that which has 
been produced by Australians for the love of it and not for pay. nor as a 
discharge of official functions. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 351 

In the popuJar mind, amateur efforts are frequently associated with the 
idea of inferiority, but the persons who will be referred to in this division 
of Australian Astronomy need not fear that the adjective " amateur " is 
given to them with any intention on my part of underrating their abilities 
as astronomers or of placing them and their work in a class below that of 
officialdom. The name of John Tebbutt will be found amongst them. They 
are, therefore, in good company, and may well be proud of it. 

The astronomical work done by Mr. John Tebbutt at his own observatorv, 
Windsor, New South Wales, claims for him first place on the list of private 
citizens in Australia who have cultivated astronomy for its own sake. 

His first contribution to the store of observed astronomical phenomena 
dates from 1854. His fame amongst astronomers the world over dates 
from his discovery of the G-reat Comet of 1861. His title to the full recogni- 
tion of valuable service rendered for the credit of Australia and the advance- 
ment of astronomical science is based on a lifetime of assiduous and diligent 
observations of great accuracy and importance, extending over a period 
of more than half a century. Mr. Tebbutt is now an old man and has prac- 
tically closed his career as an astronomer, and it seems just to remind Aus- 
tralians that they should lose no opportunity to honour this veteran observer 
and to show an adequate appreciation of his merits. 

Mr. Tebbutt, in his History and Description of the Windsor Observatory, 
written in 1887 (17), and in his later work, Astronomical Memoirs, written in 
1908 (18), gives a full account of the Windsor Observatory and of the work 
done by him, from which the information contained in the following notes 
has been drawn, not infrequently in his own words. 

Mr. John Tebbutt' s ObservatorYj Windsor, New South Wales. 

(18) " At the eastern extremity of the municipal town of Windsor, lies 
the Peninsular Estate, a tract containing about 250 acres of the richest 
alluvial land. It is so called because it is nearly surrounded by the courses 
of the Hawkesbury Kiver and its tributary, the South Creek, at their con- 
fluence. On a hill situated a little south-west of the middle of the estate, 
and whose summit is about 50 feet above the mean tide level," stands the 
residence of Mr. Tebbutt and his observatory, whose geographical position is — 
Latitude 33° 36' 30" 8 south ; 
Longitude lOh. 3m. 20s. 51 east. 

Tebbutt's work begins in 1854. He was then 20 years of age. His 
equipment from 1854 to 1861 consisted of a sextant, artificial horizon, and 
a " common but excellent eight-day pendulum clock," and a telescope, 
If inches aperture. He chiefly employed these instruments for self training 
and " providing gratuitous information of a popular character for the daily 
newspapers." To these instruments were added a refracting telescope, by 
Jones, of 3J inches aperture and 48 inches focal length, in Noven\ber, 1861 ; 
and an excellent eight-day half-second box chronometer by Parkinson and 
Frodsham, in April, 1864. At the close of 1863, a small observatory was 
erected on the western side of his residence. It consisted of a small wooden 
building, comprising a transit room and a prime vertical room. An octagonal 
tower, rising from the centre of the building, served to accommodate the 
refracting telescope, which he himself mounted in 1864 " according to the 



352 Federal Handbook. 



Sisson or old Englisli method." In the same year he installed also a transit 
instrument with object glass of 2-1 inches aperture, and 20 inches focal length, 
made for him by Tornaghi of Sydney. The local mean time was determined 
with this instrument for many years. 

All extrameridional observations were made with the .3J-inch telescope till 
1872. This was provided with two ring micrometers made by Tornaghi, and 
eyepieces ranging in magnifying power from .30 to 120. 

In 1874, he acquired an equatorial by Cooke and Son, of York, -with object 
glass of 4:J inches aperture and 70 inches focal length, mounted according 
to Fraunhofer method. 

In the same year a circular wooden building, 12 feet in diameter, was 
erected close to the observatory for the installation of this equatorial. 

" In 1879 a substantial observatory of brick was erected on the south- 
west side of the old buildings," and the equatorial, together with a new transit 
instrument by Cooke and Son, were permanently mounted on solid masonrv 
piers within the new building. 

The object glass of the transit instrument has a clear aperture of 3 inches 
and a focal length of 35 inches. 

Another fine chronometer by John Poole was acquired in 1882. 

Finally, in 1887, to the equipment of Mr. Tebbutt's observatory was 
added a fine equatorial 8 inches aperture and 115 inches focal length, mounted 
on the Fraunhofer or German plan, and provided with all the usual requisites 
of a first-class instrument. It was made in 1882 by Grubb, of Dublin. 

In the annual reports of his operations, of which he gives a methodical 
and faithful account from 1864 to 1907, it is shown that his astronomical 
activities were chiefly directed towards the comets and lunar occultations 
of stars, but he contributed also, throughout his career, to the study of the 
phenomena of Jupiter's satellites, the variability of special stars, such as 
7] Argus, E, Carinae, and others, and later, with his larger telescope, devoted 
much energy to micrometric comparisons of the major and minor planets 
with neighbouring stars and the observation of the more interesting southern 
binary stars. 

His record of work on comets is remarkable. He began with the discovery 
of the Great Comet of 1861, which caused a sensation, not only on account 
of its brilliancy, but also because the earth passed through its tail. He 
observed the return of the celebrated Encke's comet in the following year, 
and on six other apparitions in the years 1865, 1875, 1878, 1888, 1894, and 
1898, and on three or four occasions he was the first to detect it. In 1881 he 
discovered another comet, which became a fine object as it passed into the 
Northern Hemisphere, and is specially distinguished by being the first comet 
of which a satisfactory photograph was obtained and whose spectrum was 
satisfactorily studied. 

Schaeberle's Comet 1881 V. was independently discovered by Tebbutt. 

More than 40 other comets, mostly strangers to our system, were observed 
by Mr. Tebbutt, and followed night after night from the earliest opportunity 
to the last degree of visibility, determining for each a series of accurate posi- 
tions, which were employed by him or by other astronomers for the compu- 
tation of the orbits of these bodies. These observations often extended 
over several weeks — sometimes months. The comet discovered in America 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 353 

by Brooks, in 1892, was kept under observation at Windsor on 62 nights ; 
the Coddington Pauly Comet of 1898, for 103 nights ; and Halley's Comet, 
on 21 nights — from December, 1909 to July, 1910. In 1912 he made micro- 
metric measures of Gale's Comet on nine nights. 

From 1862 to 1906 he published 35 papers on Comets in the Monthly 
Notices of the R.A.S. ; 73 papery in the A.N. ; 18 in the Observatory ; 5 in 
the B.A.A.; 2 in Transactions of the Philosophical Society of Neiv South Wales. 

Such is Mr. Tebbutt's share of Australia's contribution to cometary 
astronomy. 

Next in order on the initial programme of the Windsor Observatory come 
the Lunar Occultations of Stars. Systematic observations of this class 
were commenced in 1864 and were continued till 1904, and form part of the 
regular work of every year of this period, ^vith very few exceptions. Between 
the years 1896 and 1900, 435 occultations were observed. This will give 
some idea of Mr. Tebbutt's activity in this branch. 

His results of these observations have been widely utilized by astronomers 
in investigations of longitudes by absolute methods. 

Tebbutt's results of occultations observed in the years 1864-1870 were 
in 1896 employed by Dr. Hugo Clemens, in a determination of the longitude 
of the Windsor Observatory, and formed the material for an inaugural dis- 
sertation entitled Bestimmung der Ldnge von Windsor, New South Wales, etc. 

Similar results obtained from observations of the years 1873-1876 were 
iLsed by Dr. Auwers in conjunction with those observed at Melbourne in 1874 
and 1875, for the purpose of obtaining a fundamental meridian for Australia 
by absolute methods. 

The longitude of Windsor, derived from Tebbutt's observations has the 
following values, viz. : — 

Clemens, by observations of occultations, 1864-1870 — lOh. .3m. 21 ■25s. 
Auwers, by observations of occultations, 1873-1876 — lOh. 3m. 20* 60s. 
By telegraphic methods — lOh. 3m. 19- 87s. 

The third item which forms a considerable part of the regular work of 
the Windsor Observatory, is the systematic observation of the phenomena 
of Jupiter's satellites. 

Records of this work are found in (at least) 25 different years. 

" The Windsor observations of jovian eclipses from 1894 to 1899 were 
employed by Professor J. A. C. Oudemans, of Utrecht, in 1906, in his investi- 
gation on the mutual occultations and eclipses of the satellites of Jupiter 
in 1908." 

The record of Mr. Tebbutt's work on variable stars consists chiefly of 
systematic observations of the well-known southern variables rj Argus and 
R. Carinae. 

7] Argus was kept under observation every year from 1864 to 1876, 
and from 1880 to 1890, in which last year, according to Mr. Tebbutt, no 
further change was detected in its lustre. 

R. Carinae was also regularly observed in each year from 1880 to 1890, 
and also in 1895 and succeeding years till 1898. During the period 1880-1890, 
ten maxima were recorded. 

This series has proved very valuable in the investigation of the secular 
inequalities of the star. 



354 Federal Handbook. 



The Windsor observations of double stars commenced in 1880. After 
1887, when the larger instrument (the G-rubb 8-inch refractor) was used, 
special attention was directed to the interesting southern binaries — a Cen- 
tauri, y Centauri, and y Corona Australis, and to difficult southern pairs. 
A large amount of other astronomical observations of a miscellaneous 
character must be credited to Mr. Tebbutt. Among these the more note- 
worthy are the transit of Venus of 1874, which was successfully observed 
at Windsor, and several transits of Mercury. 

Many Lunar and Solar eclipses were observed by him, and his comparisons 
of the major planets and a score of the minor planets with neighbouring 
stars are very valuable. 

In 1855, Mr. Francis Abbott, another enthusiastic amateur, was entering 
the field of observational astronomy in Tasmania. He erected a small 
observatory at Hobart, and provided it with a portable transit instrument 
of 24 inches focal length by Varley, and an achromatic telescope of 3J inches 
aperture by Cooke and Son, and commenced observations for local time and 
observations on comets and variable stars. Later he improved his equipment 
by procuring a larger transit instrument by Dallmeyer, and an excellent 
telescope of 4^ inches aperture and 5 feet focal length by Dallmeyer, 
equatorially mounted. These he imported in 1862. A Dollond, 7-feet 
equatorial came into use soon after. 

He was provided with a micrometer, a spectroscope, a standard clock, 
and a chronometer, and batteries of eye pieces ranging in power from 25 to 
450. 

He appears to have continued time determinations, for the benefit of 
himself and of the community, for a number of years, and his observations 
on comets and on the variable star t] Argus are very numerous. 

From 1861 to 1874 he contributed about thirteen papers to Monthly 
Notices, which included observations of Comets 1861 II., 1862 II., and 
1865 I., this last comet having been discovered by him one day before Moesta 
discovered it at Santiago (19) (20). Observations of the transit of Mercury 
of 12th November, 1861 and 4th November, 1868, and many observations 
of the variable star 7^ Argus. 

Criticisms on these latter observations by Herschel, Airy, Lassell, Proctor, 
and others are published in Monthly Notices, Vol. 31 and 32. 

He also contributed some twenty papers to the Proceedings of the R.S. 
of Tasmania in the years 1863-1874. 
Mr. Abbott died in February, 1883. 

Tebbutt and Abbott are the earliest systematic observers in the history 
of amateur astronomy in Australia. 

In this place the name of Ludwig Becker may be recorded as the 
observer who produced valuable drawings of the Donati Comet, 1858, which 
he made by means of an equatorial, forming part of the equipment of 
Neumayer's Magnetic Observatory, at Flagstaff Hill, Melbourne. These 
fine drawings are published in the Transactions of the Philosophical Institute 
(afterwards the Royal Society) of Victoria, Vol. 4, 1859. 

The transit of Venus of 1874 gave the opportunity to several amateur 
observers in various parts of Australia to bring their work into public notice. 
Among these appear the names of T. D. Smeaton, F. C. Singleton, and 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 355 

A. W. Dobbie. The first two observed the transit at Adeh\ide, with small 
equatorials of 3| and 3 inches aperture, and the third, with an 8|-inch 
reflector. Memoirs R.A.S., Vol. 47, 1882-3. 

Mr. Dobbie, although his astronomical work was of an occasional character, 
for many years maintained a keen interest in astronomy. He was one of 
the observing members of the Mars section of the British Astronomical 
Association, and constructed his own reflecting telescopes. He completed 
one 18 inches aperture in 1905. 

Two well-known observers who commenced astronomical work in the 
early seventies are the late Mr. W. J. MacDounell and Mr. G. D. Hirst. 

Mr. MacDonnell was residing at Port Macquarie in 1871. He had an 
observatory there equipped with a 6-inch achromatic equatorial by Grubb, 
of Dublin, with which he made observations for a few years. Later he moved 
to Sydney, where, up to the time of his death, on 22nd September, 1910, he 
assiduously continued his astronomical observations with a 4|-inch achro- 
matic telescope by Parkes, of Binningham, an excellent instrument, equa- 
torially mounted and driven by clock work. 

He observed the transit of Venus of 1874, as a member of one of the 
official parties stationed at Eden, under the Eev. Mr. Scott, once Director 
of the Sydney Observatory. 

He was one of the observers of the Jupiter section of the British 
Astronomical Association up to the time of his death, and contributed several 
papers and notes to the Journal and Memoirs of that association, on Jupiter, 
on Halley's Comet, occultations and other subjects of a more general astro- 
nomical interest. 

Mr. G. D. Hirst, of Sydney, is noted for his remarkable skill in astronomical 
drawings. He has been a member of the observing sections of Jupiter 
and Mars of the British Astronomical Association, and several of his 
beautiful draAvings of these planets have been reproduced in the Memoirs 
of the Association. 

The Director of the Mars observing section — M. Antoniadi, referring 
in one of his reports to the work of Mr. Hirst, says " The drawings of Mr. 
Hirst are coloured and represent the general appearance of the Planet (Mars) 
more faithfully than any others received during the apparition." (1905) 
Memoirs B.A.A., Vol. XVII., Part II. 

Mr. Hirst used an achromatic telescope by Cooke, equatorially mounted, 
object glass 4|-inch aperture. 

His work extends over a period of 40 years, and includes, in addition to 
studies of surface detail of Jupiter and Mars at several oppositions, observa- 
tions of comets and double stars, the results of which, or of most of them, 
have been published in the Journal and Memoirs of the B.A.A. and in the 
Journal and Proceedings of the R-S- of New South Wales, to which societies 
he has contributed also various papers and notes on other subjects. 

Among the private citiz<!ns interested in Australian astronomy not pre- 
viously mentioned, whose contributions to it, or valuable services rendered 
to, in the period 1880-1890, shoidd be placed on record, are the following : — - 
In Tasmania, A. B. Biggs ; in Victoria, Dr. Bone, David Ross, James 
Oddie ; In Queensland, J. E. Davidson ; In New South Wales 
H. F. Madsen, H. Watt, and H. Corbett. 



356 Federal Handbook. 



The late Mr. Biggs was a judicious and ingenious observer, and some 
of his observing instruments and apparatus were made by himself. On the 
occasion of the transit of Venus of 1874, the assistance of Mr. Biggs was very 
highly appreciated by the observing party from the United States, at Camp- 
belltown, in overcoming instrumental difficulties. The principal instrument 
with which he made his observations, especially in the years of his greater 
activity — 1883-1887 —was a reflecting telescope with mirror 8h inches 
diameter. 

He employed also a refractor of 3-inch aperture, and was provided with a 
sidereal clock, a chronometer, a small direct vision spectroscope by Browning, 
and other minor apparatus. 

His subjects of observation were chiefly comets. The results of his work 
were published in the Monthly Notices of the R.A.S., Vol. 45, pp. 348 and 376. 

He also contributed thirteen papers, bearing on astronomy, to the Pro- 
ceedings of the R.S- of Tasinania, from 1884 to 1891. 

The late Dr. Bone built a private observatory on his grounds at 
Castlemaine, Victoria, where in 1881 he installed an equatorial telescope 
with achromatic object glass 8-inch aperture, by Grubb, of Dublin, an excel- 
lent instrument, provided mth all requisites for fine astronomical work. 
He had this instrument mounted and in working order just in time for the 
transit of Venus of 1882, which he observed successfully. He had planned 
a useful programme of work for himself, which, however, was not to be 
carried out, for he died very shortly after. 

But his telescope was destined to do good work for many years after him, 
in the hands of Mr. John Tebbutt, at the Windsor Observatory, by whom 
the instrument was bought. 

Mr. David Eoss, of Melbourne, in 1883, while watching the heavens for 
the expected periodical comet of Pons, discovered a small southern comet 
(1883 II.) His instrument was a small portable 3-inch achromatic telescope 
mounted on a short tripod. Later he constructed for himself a 6-inch reflect- 
ing telescope of the Newtonian type, which he mounted equatorially. He 
has employed it systematically during all these years, chiefly searching for 
comets ; and in 1906, he made his second discovery of Comet 1906 II. 

In 1887, Mr. James Oddie had erected at his own cost an observatory 
at Mount Pleasant, Ballarat, Victoria, which he equipped with various appa- 
ratus, chiefly reflecting telescopes locally constructed. 

He engaged the services of the late Captain Baker, who at the time had 
become favorably known for his skill in making parabolic reflectors, and 
placed him in charge of the observatory. 

A mirror 26 inches in diameter was completed by Captain Baker in 1891, 
which was mounted equatorially as a Newtonian telescope driven by clock- 
work. Another 12-inch Newtonian telescope was also mounted. 

The observatory was provided with a small transit telescope, astronomical 
clock, and accessories. 

The instruments were well housed in spacious wooden buildings which 
contained in addition to other apartments, a large lecture room. 

In 1888, Mr. Oddie imported an excellent equatorial telescope \\'ith object 
glass 9 inches clear aperture and 135 inches focal length by Grubb, of Dublin, 
which, however, was never taken out of its packing cases. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 357 

Tliis is the instrument wliich, in 1910, was presented by Mr. Oddie to 
the Commonwealth Government and subsequently erected .t the Mount 
Stromlo Observatory in the Federal territory. 

Mr. Oddie's observatory at Mount Pleasant, was chiefly intended for 
the education and entertainment of the public of Ballarat, and no astronomical 
work of a systematic character was ever done there. The observatory was 
dismantled in 1910. 

On 21st July, 1889, Mr. J. Ewen Davidson, of Mackay, Queensland, made 
the discovery of Comet 1889 IV. by means of one of the telescopes used hv 
the British Expedition under Captain Morris, E.E., for the observation of 
the transit of Venus, in December, 1882, at Jimbour, Queensland, and sold 
afterwards to Mr. Norris, of Towns ville. 

Several amateur makers of reflecting telescopes were very active during 
this decade, and contributed considerably to foster astronomical interest. 
These are — 

E. W. Wigmore and R. Shafer, of Melbourne ; Dobbie, of Adelaide ; 
H. Watt, H. Corbett, Walter Gale, who commenced constructing 
his own telescopes in 1882 when he was still a school boy, and H. F. 
Madsen, of New South Wales ; and others less well known. 

Mr. H. F. Madsen's paper in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of Neiv 
South Wales, upon the construction of a reflecting telescope of 18 inches 
aperture is a valuable contribution to the subject. 

In later years, and up to the present time, we find the number of amateur 
observers and persons interested in the advancement of Australian astronomy 
gradually and widely increasing, and there are among them several names 
which have gained distinction through the value of their work. 

Messrs. R. T. A. Innes and C. J. Merfield were at one time serving enthusias- 
tically in the ranks of amateur astronomers in New South Wales — Innes till 
1896, when he left Australia to take up an official position under Dr. Gill, 
at the Cape Observatory ; and Merfield, till 1905, when he joined the Sydney 
Observatory. The work of these men, which was done in their amateur 
days, should be noted here. 

Innes used a refractor of 6j-inch aperture, and a Newtonian reflector, 
with a mirror of 16 inches diameter, and carried on observations of variable 
stars and double stars ; some of his results were published in the Monthly 
Notices of the R.A.S- and in the Journal of the British Astronomical Associa- 
tion. List of probable new double stars, and Occulta tion of Antares, 1894, 
31st October, Monthly Notices, Vol. 55 ; on the proper motion of Lacaille, 
4336, Monthly Notices, Vol. 56; new double stars, Journal of the British 
Astronomical Association, Vol. 6; observations made at Sydney in 1895; 
and observations of variable stars, 1895-96 ; and order of brightness of tlie 
1st magnitude stars. Journal of the British Astronomical Association, Vol. 6, 
etc. 

Innes contributed also papers on the secular jXTturbat ions of the 
Earth's orbit by Mars, Monthly Notices, Vol. 52 ; the secular perturbations 
of the Earth arising from the action of Venus, Monthly Notices, Vol. 53 ; 
elements of Comet 1894 (Gale, 1st April), A.N. 3231 ; Table to facilitate the 
application of Gauss's method of computing secular perturbations, Montfdy 
Notices of the R.A.S. , Vol. 154, and other writings. 



358 Federal Handbook. 



Merfield employed a refractor of Gj-incli aperture by Cooke, equatorially 
mounted ; a reflector, equatorially mounted, mirror 7 inches diameter ; a 
small transit circle, with object glass 2 J inches aperture ; chronometers ; 
and a tape chronograph. 

With this equipment he conducted systematic observations for several 
years, chiefly on coloured stars and comets. 

Most of the astronomical data for the use of observers in New South 
Wales on special events, such as predictions of occultations, elements and 
ephemeris of newly discovered comets, ephemeris of expected periodical 
comets, times and explanatory notes of eclipses of the sun and of the moon, 
and other celestial phenomena of public interest were prepared very fre- 
quently by Innes, and later, from 1894 to 1905, very regularly and almost 
entirely by Merfield. 

Gravitational astronomy was, however, the work in which Merfield was 
particularly interested, and to which he devoted most of the time he could 
spare from his ordinary daily occupation. 

Amongst the most important of his papers on this and allied subjects, 
the following may be mentioned : — Definitive orbit elements of comet 1898 
VII. ; Definitive orbit elements of comet 1899 I. ; Definitive orbit elements 
of comet 1901 I. ; Secular perturbations of Eros arising from the actions 
of the eight major planets of the solar system ; Determination of the 
secular perturbations of minor planet Ceres, arising from the actions of 
the eight major planets of the solar system ; Secular perturbations of (7) 
Iris, arising from the actions of the eight major planets of the solar system ; 
Secular perturbations of Ceres, arising from the action of Jupiter (with 
an important appendix on the co-efficients of the hyper-geometrical series F 
a ^ y X)- Tables of the two hypergeometrical functions — F (^, f, 2, sin^ 

I), andF(-i^, 2, sinH). 

Walter F. Gale, one of the best known and most skilful observers of New 
South Wales, had been devoted to astronomical observations and the making 
of reflecting telescopes since 1882, but it was not till ten years later that he 
became possessed of a sufficiently suitable equipment for systematic work. 
In 1892, by means of an exquisitely defining reflecting telescope by With, of 
8| inches aperture, he made many observations, particularly of the planet 
Mars, which, with four drawings, were published in the Journal and Memoirs 
of the British Astronomical Association. This observer was the first, it appears, 
to note the delicate markings now known as the " oases " of Mars, as recorded 
by Flammarion and Antoniadi. In 1893 he observed the total eclipse of 
the sun at Mina Bronces, in Chile, and has since " chased " three other solar 
eclipses, but each time met with adverse weather conditions. 

He also devoted much attention to Jupiter and his Galilean satellites, 
several hundreds of observations of which are published in the Memoirs of 
the B.A.A. 

Mr. Gale has independently discovered six comets, two of which bear his 
name, namely : — Gale 1894 II., and Gale 1912 a. 

Comet 1888 I., Sawerthal, was found by him independently only one 
day after Sawerthal had discovered it at the Cape, and the other three comets 
proved to be returns of periodical comets — Fabry 1886 I., Winnecke 1892 TV., 
and Tempel^ 1894. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 359 

He also discovered several double stars and a ring nebula. 

Notes upon these discoveries were published in the Astronomische Nach- 
richten, in the Monthly Notices of the R.A.S., and other journals. 

Perhaps the best service rendered to Australian astronomy by Mr. Gale 
was the part he took in conjunction with Innes in forming the New South 
Wales branch of the British Astronomical Association. 

This branch was constituted in September, 1894, when it consisted of thirteen 
members, namely :— John Tebbutt, R. T. A. Innes, W. F. Gale, G. H. Knibbs, 
C. J. Merfield, H- Wright. G. Butterfield. C Mathews, F. D. Edmonds. R. D. 
Lewers, J. W. Askew, T. W. Craven, and C. C Carter. It made rapid progress 
and its roll of members gradually increased. 

In 1895, a special section for the observation of coloured stars was first 
formed, with Merfield as director and two observers, namely — H. Wright, who 
employed a reflecting telescope of 8J inches aperture ; and F. K. McDonall, with 
a 2^-in. refractor; Merfield himself using a 7-in. reflector. Upwards of 5,000 
observations were made of 458 stars in accordance with a carefully planned pro- 
gramme, which was completed in the years 1895-97. The results of this work 
are published in Vol. VI., No. 9, and Vol. VIII., No. 1 of the Journal B.A.A. 

In 1897 special observing sections were formed as follow : — Comet 
section^Director, John Tebbutt ; Jupiter section — Director, W. F. Gale ; 
Sun and Meteors — Director, F. K. McDonall. 

The first president of the branch was Mr. John Tebbutt, in which office he 
was followed by G. H. Knibbs, the present Commonwealth Statistician, who 
in the year 1900 prepared a paper on " The Sun's motion in Space," which 
was published in the Proceedings of the R.S- of New South Wales, Vol. XXXIV. 
It contains the history and bibliography of the subject from Giordano Bruno 
(1584) to Kobold (1900), and is qualified by the author as a step preliminary 
to a further consideration of the whole question, wliich however, his subsequent 
official duties prevented him from carrying out. 

The paper, which bears clear e\adence of a vast amount of careful research 
renders a complete account of the state of knowledge on the subject existing 
up to the year 1900, and forms an astronomical contribution of great value. 

The third president (Session 1899-1900) was the Rev. Dr. Roseby, a 
fluent writer on astronomical subjects, and more particularly interested in 
gravitational astronomy. The elliptic elements of Gale Comet 1894 b, were 
computed by him. 

Subsequent occupants of the chair were W. F. Gale, W. J. MacDonnell, 
G. D. Hirst, and C J. Merfield, whose Avork has already been separately 
referred to, and next to these come H. Wright (1907-1909), J. Nangle (1909- 
1911), and again the Rev. Dr. Roseby (1911-1913). 

Mr. H- Wright has for a long time been devoted to astronomical observa- 
tions, for which he uses a reflecting telescope of the Newtonian type, by 
Browning, 8h inches aperture equatorially mounted. Amongst the papers 
published in the Journal of the Association, containing the results of liis 
work are the following : — 

Double star observations and observations of meteors. Vol. VI. ; 
Daylight occultation of Antares, Vol. VII. ; 
Chamber's catalogue of red stars, Vol. XI. ; 

Some southern nebulae and tlie trapezium of Orion, Vol. XIT. ; (••omet 
Moorehouse 1908 e, Vol. XIX. 



360 Federal Handbook. 



He is a member of the " Jupiter " and " Mars " observing sections, and 
a number of his drawings and observations of these planets, also of Saturn 
and Halley's Comet, have been published in the Memoirs of the B.A.A. At 
one opposition of Mars there were only three southern observers, and his 
contribution carried considerable value and was highly appreciated. He 
has observed and sketched sun spots and solar prominences, and published 
several papers on astronomical subjects of a more general interest. 

James Xangle is another practical observer of considerable merit and 
the possessor of a first-class achromatic telescope, by Cooke and Sons, of 
6j-in. aperture, mounted equatorially and driven by clockwork, which 
had been used by Innes when a resident of Sydney. 

The instrument is housed in a well-built and commodious observatory, 
where work is being done with efficiency and comfort. 

The nature of his observations and the subjects in w^hich he is more 
particularly interested are shown by his published results in the Journal of 
the Association, some of which I note here. 

Double star measures. Vols. XVII. and XXI. 

Measures of a Centauri, Vol. XIX. ; 

Measures of p Eridani, Lacaille 2145, Vols. XIX. and XX. ; 

Provisional orbits of p Eridani and h 5014, Vols. XIX. ; and XXI. ; 

Orbit of B Miiscae, Vol. XX. ; 

Cluster about K Crucis, Vols. XIX. and XVIII. ; 

Saturn's diameter. Vol. XVIII. ; 

Occulta tions of d Librae and Uranus, Vol. XVIII. 

The New South Wales branch of the B.A.A. is still in full working activity. 

Of the total number of 76 Australian members of the parent association, 
more than one half belong to this branch. 

Mr. E. H. Beattie, the present secretary, is also a contributor to the 
advancement of Australian amateur astronomy. He has a good observatory, 
equipped with an excellent equatorial refractor by Grubb, 6J inches 
aperture, driven by clockwork, and provided with all the accessories re- 
quired for micrometric measurements. His principal observations are — 
occultation phenomena of Jupiter's satellites, double stars, comets, eclipses 
and occultations of stars and planets by the moon. 

The results of his work, as well as his reports of work done by the branch 
generally, to the parent association have been and are being regularly pub- 
lished in the Journal of the B.A.A. 

Mr. T. H. Close renders good service by computing comets' orbits and 
lunar occultations by graphical methods, and furnishing such data to those 
interested. 

Other members of this branch figure in the Journal and Memoirs of the 
Association as members of some particular observing section, and as con- 
trfbutors of astronomical papers, notes, or drawings. These are J. E. Bell 
(Solar Section), H. Brown (Comet Halley), R. H. Bulkeley (Comet Halley), 
A. B. Cobham (Jupiter and Mars), the late Dr. R. D. Givin (Jupiter, Mars, 
and the Sun), Gr. H. Hoskins (Mars), J. C. Jenkinson (Auroral and Zodiacal 
light), F. K. McDonall (Meteors), D Shearer (Mars), Rev. W. Swindlehurst, 
P. Chauleur, Captain Edmonds, and Mr. N. J. Basnett, who specializes in 
meridian observations for the accurate determination of time. 

For the published results of the above observers, see list in Appendix. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 361 

In 1897, a branch of the British Astronomical Association was formed 
in Victoria, and the attempt was made to encourage the possessors of astro- 
nomical telescopes to midertake systematic observations with them. The 
principal names of those who worked energetically in organizing and after- 
wards struggling to set the branch in working order are those of — 

R. W. Wigmore, the late Professor Kernot, Dr. E. F. J. Love, C 
Oliver. M.C.E., T. W. Fowler, M.C.E., Professor Barnard, Mrs. 
Rose Whiting, David Ross, and George Smale. 

The inaugural meeting of the branch took place on the 16th December, 
1897, under the presidency of the late R. L. J. Ellery, who held office till 
the year 1900, the chair being successively occupied after him by the Rev. 
John Meiklejohn, Dr. Love, Professor Kernot, and Professor Barnard. 

R. W. Wigmore was secretary for the period (1897-1900), David Ross 
(1900-1901), and George Smale (1901-1905). 

The difficulty which prevented the sound development of this branch 
and eventually caused its extinction at the end of 1905, was the failure to 
induce a sufficient number of its members to use their telescopes for some 
definite astronomical purpose, and in accordance with a suitably prep red 
plan. 

Professor Barnard has been for many years interested in the observation 
of variable stars. He is at present in charge of a small observatory recently 
erected at the Royal Military College of the Commonwealth, on the summit 
of Mount Pleasant, near the Federal capital site. 

The observatory is provided with an equatorial refractor, by Cooke and 
Sons, of 4J inches aperture, and a portable transit instrument, and it is 
expected that Professor Barnard will be able to continue there regular 
observations on variable stars. 

The object of this observatory is principally educational. 

There is only one other State of the Commonweilth at present in which 
an Astronomical Society exists. This is South Australia. 

The Astronomical Society of South Australia is intimately associated with 
the Adelaide Observatory. Until the end of 1906, it held its meetings 
at the Observatory, and although at present the members meet in another 
building, the Observatory instruments are still at their disposal, and in fact, 
the present director states " the observations of variable and double stars 
have now been conmienced by certain members of the local Astronomical 
Society, the equatorial telescope of the Observatory being used for this 
purpose." 

This society dates back to the year 1892, when as a section of the Royal 
Society of South Australia, it held its first meeting at the Adelaide Observatory, 
on the 5th April of that year, under the presidency of the late Sir Charles 
Todd. 

The annual reports of the society show a considerable number of persons 
(40 or more) who have at some period been interested in astronomy, and 
among them there are several whose writings on astronmnical subjects appeal 
in the Transactions of the society. (For the principal titles and references to 
these works, see Appendix B.) It does not appear, however, that astronomical 
observations of a systematic character have been made by any observer 
in South Australia for the object of carrying out a continuous and well- 



362 Federal Handbook. 



defined astronomical programme, though Mr. Sydney Manning, of McLaren 
Vale, has contributed observational notes on comets and the Kappa Crucis 
cluster to the Journal of the B.A.A. 

There are no records of astronomical results obtained by amateur astro- 
nomers in Queensland and Western Australia,, with the exception of those 
registered in the papers given in the Appendix. 

(d) Australian Expeditions on Special Astronomical Occasions. 

There were five occasions upon which the official astronomers of Australia 
recognised it as their duty to organize astronomical expeditions for observing 
important astronomical phenomena at places remote from their permanent 
observatories. 

These occasions are — 

1. The total eclipse of the sun of December, 1871 — at Eclipse Island, 

ofi the extreme north of Australia ; 

2. The transit of Venus of December, 1874 ; 

3. The transit of Venus of December, 1882 ; 

4. The total eclipse of the sun of May, 1910 — at Bruni Island, in 

the South Pacific ; 

5. The total eclipse of the sun of April, 1911 — at Vavau (Friendly 

Island) . 

1. This eclipse occurred on the 11th December, 1871. The path of 
totality crossed the Gulf of Carpentaria, touching Australia near its extreme 
northern points. 

The proposal to fit out an expedition to observe the eclipse was made by 
the late Professor Wilson, and, on the recommendation of the Royal Society 
of Victoria, the Governments of Victoria and New South Wales authorized 
their respective astronomers — -R. L. J. Ellery and H. C. Russell — to organize 
a party of observers suitably equipped for the purpose. 

The locality selected for observation was a small island ofE the north coast, 
called, since. Eclipse Island. The Queensland Government provided the, 
then new, steamer Governor Blackall to carry the expedition to its destina- 
tion and back. 

The party consisted of the principal assistants of the Melbourne and 
Sydney Observatories and a large number of other observers recruited 
amongst the most eligible in the colonies. 

The expedition was provided with the 7j-in. equatorial, by Merz, of 
the Sydney Observatory, upon which was mounted a camera with lens of 
3 inches aperture and 30 inches focal length ; the 4|-in. equatorial of the 
Melbourne Observatory, and several other smaller equatorial telescopes, 
all driven by clockwork ; photographic and spectroscopic apparatus fitted 
for the purpose. Special instruments, adapted for the occasion, had been 
forwarded by the Eclipse Committee of the British Association for the 
service of the expedition. 

The expedition started from Sydney on 27th November, 1871, reached 
Eclipse Island on 7th December, and had the instruments ready by the 10th 
December, the day before the eclipse. On the 11th, imfavorable weather 
prevailed, and the sky was overcast during the whole time of totality. 

Thus the expedition failed in its main object. 



Astronomy axd Geodesy. 363 



2. For the observation of the transit of Venus, in 1874, the official astro- 
nomers of the time — Ellery, Russell, and Todd — organized various parties, 
which were sent to occupy favorable spots in their own respective colonies. 

In the colon V of Victoria, Ellery selected, in addition to the Melbourne 
Observatory, where he himself and his assistants observed the transit, three 
subsidiary stations. These were — 

Mornington, on the shores of Port Phillip Bay, and about 30 miles 

south of Melbourne ; 
View Hill, Sandhurst, 86 miles north-west of Melbourne ; 
Glenrowan, 150 miles north-east of Melbourne. 

The observations at the Melbourne Observatory were directed by 
Ellery using the 8-in. equatorial, an 18-in. altazimuth, the Grubb 4-ft. 
reflector, and Dallmeyer's 4-in. photoheliograph. Good observations of 
internal contact at " Ingress " and " Egress " were obtained. Many 
micrometric measurements of diameter of Venus were made by a double 
image micrometer, and physical phenomena well observed. Several photo- 
graphs were secured, both with the photo-heliograph and the great telescope. 

The party at Mornington was in charge of Professor Wilson, of the Mel- 
bourne University; its equipment consisted of a 4|-in. equatorial, by 
Troughton and Simms, with which micrometric measurements and contact 
observations were made ; fair results of '^ Ingress " and " Egress " 
phenomena were obtained. 

At View Hill, Sandhurst, Mr. C Moerlin (assistant of the Melbourne 
Observatory) directed the operations. The instrument employed was an 
equatorially-mounted telescope, with objective 6|-in. aperture, by Ertel, of 
Munich, provided with a double image micrometer. Cloudy weather pre- 
vented contact observations at " Ingress," but some satisfactory results of 
" Egress " phenomena were obtained. 

At Glenrowan, the party was in charge of Messrs. A. C Allan and James 
Gilbert. The instruments employed were a 4i-in. equatorial, by Cooke 
and Sons, and a reflecting telescope, by Browning, 8J-in. aperture, 
equatorially mounted. Observations of " Ingress " were made satisfactorily 
in clear weather, except the first external contact, but no observations of 
"Egress" could be made, the sky being overcast. 

In New South Wales, Russell, with the aid of the local Royal Society, 
was able to obtain sufficient encouragement and assistance from his Govern- 
ment to carry out the extensive preparations which he had planned with the 
object of securing observations on tlie eventful day of 9th December, 1874, 
at four different places in his colony. (G) 

These were — 

The Sydney Observatory ; 

Eden, on the north shore of Twofold Bay, 350 miles south-west of 

Sydney ; 
Goulburn, 134 miles south-west of Sydney, 2,071 feet above sea level ; 
Woodford, in the mountainous district, 50 miles west of Sydney. 

Parties were despatched to these places equipped with equatorially- 
mounted telescopes, fitted with apparatus for pliotographing the sun, and 
provided with nutans for determining time, material for obtaining upward 
of 200 pictures of tlie suji, observing huts, and all necessary appliances. 
C.12154. 2 A 



364: Federal Handbook. 



(21) At Sydney, the observers were directed by Russell ; the instruments 
employed were the 11'4-in. equatorial, by Schroeder, fitted with photo- 
graphic apparatus, which could be quickly removed and mounted again ; 
a 4:f-in. equatorial, by Troughton and Simms ; and a 10-in. Browning 
silvered glass reflector. 

At Eden, the Rev. W. Scott conducted the work ; the instruments used 
were a 7j-in. equatorial, and two other smaller achromatic telescopes, with 
objectives 4^ inches and 3J inches aperture respectively. 

The station at Goulburn was occupied by Captain Hixson ; this party 
was provided with an achromatic telescope of 6 inches aperture, equa- 
torially mounted and fitted with a camera ; also two smaller equatorial 
refractors of 3f inches and 3 J inches aperture. 

At Woodford, the observing party was in charge of Surveyor-General 
Adams. The observations were made with 3j-in. equatorial, and a 
4-in. photoheliograph was employed for obtaining pictures of the sun. 
This station, in addition to the provisions made as at the other three 
places for taking 220 pictures, had a supply of 30 Janssen plates, each to 
hold 60 pictures. 

Mr. Tebbutt observed the transit independently at his observatory, 
Windsor, with a 4|-in. equatorial. He had fine weather, and obtained 
accurate times of the beginning and end of the transit. (18) 
In South Australia the transit was observed — - 

By Mr. Todd, at the Adelaide Observatory, the instruments used 
being the 8-in. equatorial, by T. Cooke and Sons, and a camera 
arranged to give an enlarged picture of the sun. 
By T. D. Smeaton, J.P., at his residence. North Adelaide, using an 

excellent 3i-inch equatorial by Cooke and Son. 
By F. C. Singleton, on the grounds of the Adelaide Observatory, using 

a 3-in. equatorial. 
By A. W. Dobbie, at his residence, 2 miles north-east of the Adelaide 
Observatory, using an 8|^-in. silvered glass reflecting telescope. 
The weather was unfavorable at Adelaide up to a short time after " In- 
gress " and was only intermittently clear afterwards. 

Todd obtained a few micrometric measurements, and made some obser- 
vations of the approach of internal contact at " Egress." 

Messrs. Smeaton, Singleton, and Dobbie were able to observe and record 
the times of internal and external contact at " Egress." 

On the whole, Australia acquitted itself with credit on the occasion of 
the transit of Venus of 1874, and the Australian results form an important 
part in the investigation of the solar parallax, based on the observations 
of this transit. 

3. The Australians had no opportunity of observing the complete set 
of phenomena of the transit of Venus of 7th December, 1882, as the beginning 
of the transit took place before sunrise. The importance of securing obser- 
vations of the other phases was, however, fully understood, and extensive 
preparations were made accordingly. 

In Victoria, Ellery sent out two parties from the Melbourne Observatory 
— one to Hobart, and one to Sale, Gippsland — Ellery himself remaining 
stationed at the Observatory in Melbourne. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 365 

The instruments employed at these three stations were the same as those 
with which observations of tlie previous transit had been made. 

Ellery and AVhite had fine weather and obtained good results. 

The weather in Gippsland was unfavorable, and no observations oi any 
part of the transit were made. 

In New South Wales, Russell organized, equipped, and trained five expe- 
ditions, which he was able to supply in each case with two equatorially- 
moimted telescopes of 6-inch and 4|-inch aperture. Fifteen observers took 
part in the work. The five stations occupied by these parties were Port 
Macquarie, Clarence River, Dromedary, Katoomba, and Lord Howe Island. 
Russell and his stafE were stationed at the Sydney Observatory. 

None of these parties were successful, o-ndng to adverse weather conditions. 

Tebbutt, at the Windsor Observatory, met with similar ill fortune. Thus 
no contribution was made by New South Wales observers upon the transit 
of Venus of December, 1882. 

The Government Astronomer of South Australia — Mr. Todd — observed 
the transit at Wentworth with a 4^-inch equatorial. He met with fine 
weather, and his programme of observations was successfully carried out. (15) 

4. The southern parts of Tasmania and Bruni Island were the only localities 
from which the total eclipse of the sun of 9th May, 1910, could be seen. The 
chance of successfully observing this eclipse was very small on account of 
the low altitude of the smi at the time of totality, and of the unfavorable 
and severe weather conditions generally prevailing in these particular localities 
so late in the autumn. It was known that, owing probably to this uncertainty 
and to the great length of the journey involved, no official expedition was 
to be despatched to Tasmania on this occasion, and only one private party, 
conducted by Mr. Frank McClean, was expected to come out in due course 
to occupy some spot within the belt of totality. 

Under the circumstances it was clearly the duty of Australian astronomers 
to deal with the Tasmanian eclipse. 

Dr. W. G. Duffield, of South Australia, now Professor of Natural Philo- 
sophy at the University College of Reading, brought this matter before the 
Council of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science 
at its Brisbane meeting, of January, 1909, and that Council appointed a 
committee, with Dr. Duffield as secretary, for the purpose of taking steps 
to ensure that efficient preparations were made to observe the eclipse in 
question. The result was that the Government of Victoria provided its 
own astronomer with the required means for organizing and fitting out an 
eclipse expedition to Bruni Island, which was done. 

The Joint Permanent Eclipse Committee of the Roj-al Society and Royal 
Astronomical Soci(!ty supplied a part of the equipment to this expedition. 

Unfortunately it is needless to detail the elaborate preparations made 
since the day remained completely overcast, and nothing was seen of the 
eclipse, except a general darkening of the landscape. 

Mr. Frank McClean and his party, who were stationed at Port Davey, 
some 60 miles to the west of us, and Mr. Walter Gale, of Sydney, who had 
purposely gone to Hobart on his own initiative to observe the eclipse from 
a position in that city, were also unable to see the eclipse owing to cloud 
and rain. 



366 Federal Handbook. 



5. At the Sydney meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science, in January, 1911, the same Eclipse Committee was re- 
appointed with the object of forming an Australian expedition for the obser- 
vation of the total eclipse of the sun of 29th April, 1911, at Vavau, one of 
the islands of the Tonga Group in the Pacific Ocean. Dr. Duffield being in 
Europe, Professor Moors, of the Sydney University, was appointed secretary 
to the committee. 

The committee, having succeeded in obtaining a subsidy of £500 from 
the Commonwealth, was able to organize and equip a party. 
The equipment of the expedition comprised principally — 
4-inch photoheliograph (Melbourne Observatory) ; 
4|-inch equatorial telescope (Melbourne Observatory), with two large 

portrait lens cameras attached ; 
One coronograph (Perth Observatory) ; 
One coronograph (Adelaide Observatory) ; 
One 16-inch coelostat, lent by the British Eclipse Committee ; 
One 12-inch coelostat, lent by the British Eclipse Committee ; 
One coronograph (Sydney University) ; 
Une 6-inch refracting telescope, with camera attached ; 
One smaller equatorial ; 

A large altazimuth, for time determination (Perth Observatory) ; 
Also several cameras of various sizes, chronometers, subsidiary 
apparatus, observing sheds and huts, living tents, and camp 
material. 
On the morning of the eclipse all instruments were in good order and 
adjustment and the observers had been thoroughly drilled. 

The weather was unpromising, and the face of the sun was obscured 
intermittently by passing clouds up to the beginning, and during a con- 
siderable part, of the phase of totality. Each observer, however, accom- 
plished his allotted programme, and some 45 plates were exposed during 
the three and a half minutes of totality. The plates were developed the 
dame evening, and the results obtained were found to be much better than 
was at first expected. 

The form of the corona was found to correspond to the type which had 
been observed on several previous years of minimmn solar spots. 

Although this single result brings no new knowledge of eclipse 
phenomena, yet, taken as additional evidence concerning an important 
characteristic of the solar corona which is obtainable only on relatively 
rare occasions, it becomes a valuable contribution to the store of eclipse 
records. 

(e) Determinations of Australian Longitudes. 

Until the year 1883 the adopted fundamental meridians of Australia were 
those of the Observatories of Sydney and Melbourne, and the longitude 
assigned to these meridians depended on the observation of " moon culmina- 
tions " and " moon culminating stars." 

Until these two Observatories came into existence, the fimdamental 
meridian of Australia was that which passes through Fort Macquarie, on 
one of the picturesque headlands of Sydney Harbor. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 367 

The longitude of this meridian was derived chiefly from the lunar 
observations of the early navigators, from Captain Cook in 1770 to Admiral 
King in 1817, and, later, to Sir Thomas Brisbane, Rumker, and others^ 
the results of these observers fluctuated over a wide range which, however ^ 
is quite compatible with the conditions of the time. 

Fort Macquarie was one of the points on the longitude circuit measured 
all round the globe by transportation of chronometers during Captain Fitzroy's 
famous voyage in H.M.S. Beagle in 1831-36. The longitude found for Fort 
Macquarie was lOh. 4m. 32 .14s., and if the correction Os. 115t = + 20 .52s. as 
proposed by Dr. Auwers (22) be applied to it, it becomes 10.4.52.G6, which 
is only 0.75s. in excess of what may be considered the most probable value 
of the longitude of this point at the present day. 

The meridian of Fort Macquarie remained for many years the basis from 
which explorers and surveyors established geographical positions inland 
and originally ascerta,ined the meridional subdivisions of the Australian 
Colonies geodetically or by transportation of chronometers. 

One of the earliest and most interesting undertakings of this kind was 
the definition of the 141st meridian of east longitude, which was proclaimed 
as the eastern boundary of the Colony of South Australia by an Act of King 
William IV. in 1834. 

In 1839, owing to the discrepant positions assigned to tliis meridian on 
different maps of the time, Mr. Surveyor C. J. Tyers was commissioned by 
Sir Greorge Gipps, Governor of New South Wales, to ascertain its true 
place. 

Tyers, adopting as his base the longitude of Fort Macquarie as 151° 15' 14" 
= lOh. 5m. 0" 93s., determined the longitude of a point on Batman's Hill, 
near Melbourne, by transportation of chronometers, and thence by triangula- 
tion Avith a small theodolite fixed the position of the 141st meridian, which 
he verified by sextant observations of lunar distances. 

Captain Owen Stanley recalculated Tyers' work, and the result he arrived 
at differed by only 16" 2" from that of Tyers. 

Tyers, having adopted a longitude base, which, according to more modern 
determinations, was more than 2 miles in error, and having carried out his 
own work with all the accuracy which was possible under the circumstances, 
the consequence was that the boundary was fixed, and afterwards (in 1847) 
actually marked on the ground more than 2 miles to the west of the 141st 
meridian east of Greenwich. 

The longitude of the Parramatta Observatory was determined by 
Rumker by transit observations of the moon and moon culminating 
stars. Its value is given in the Philosophical Transactions for 1829 as 
lOh. 4m. 6- 25s. 

In M.N. of the R.A.S., Vol. VI., page 213, Rumker, rediscussing 
his Parramatta observations, gives as a corrected value of this longitude 
lOh. 4m. 7- 217s. 

The first value of the longitud(! of the Sydney Observatory was obtained 
by the Rev. W. Scott in 1858, and was derived from the observations of 
21 transits of the moon. The result was lOh. 4m. 49* Os. 

In 1859 Mr. Scott observed 38 moon culminations which gave as the 
resulting longitude of the Sydney Observatory lOh. 4m. 59-8(is. (23) 



368 Federal Handbook. 



Similar observations, 50 in 1860, and 56 in 1861, furnished the value 
lOh. 5m. 6-84s. (25) 

Stone, from a rediscussion of Scott's moon culminations, observed at 
Sydney in the years 1859 and 1860, obtained longitude of Sydney Observatory 
lOh. 4m. 47-32S. (24) 

In 1861 the first determination was made of the difference of longitude 
between the Observatories of Sydney and Williamstown by the telegraphic 
exchange of clock signals, and the value obtained was Sydney-Williamstown 
Oh. 24m. 55- 38s. (26) 

The longitude of the Williamstown Observatory was determined by the 
observations of moon culminations in the years 1860, 1861, and 1862, the 
adopted result being 9h. 39m. 38- 8s. E. (11) 

The difference of longitude between the Williamstown and the Melbourne 
Observatories was found by accurate triangulation to be 16* 00s., giving 
for the longitude of the Melbourne Observatory 9h. 39m. 54" 8s. (27) 

This value was adopted and used until the year 1883. 

In 1867 the difference of longitude between the Observatories of Melbourne 
and Adelaide was measured by telegraphic exchange of clock signals, giving 
the result Oh. 25m. 33. 76s., which, being applied to the longitude of Melbourne, 
gave longitude of Adelaide Observatory 9h.l4.21m., which value was adopted, 
and remained unaltered till 1883. (28) 

Soon after the longitudes of the Sydney and Melbourne Observatories 
had been determined from lunar observations, it became evident that the 
longitude of the earlier fundamental meridian of Fort Macquarie, adopted 
by Tyers, was considerably too great, and that, consequently, the boundary 
between the Colonies of Victoria and South Australia had, very probably, 
been marked too far west, and the error was further verified by the results 
of the trigonometrical survey of Victoria, which connected the Melbourne 
Observatory with a western station of the survey near the South Australian 
boundary. 

It thus became an important matter to ascertain the position of the 
141st meridian by a fresh determination, and the Governments concerned 
ordered the work to be done by the Government Astronomers of the 
respective States. 

The plan adopted by Todd, Ellery, and Smalley was to determine the 
difference of longitude by the exchange of time signals by telegraph between 
a temporary Observatory, erected for the purpose, near the northern end of 
the marked boundary, and the Observatories of Sydney and Melbourne. 
Todd occupied the station at the boundary, using the transit instrimient 
by Trough ton and Simms, of 3J-in. aperture, which had been used at Adelaide. 
Smalley operated at the Sydney Observatory, and Chief Assistant White at 
Melbourne Observatory. 

On 9th May and lOtli May the transits of ten stars, over the meridian of 
the Observatories at Sydney and at the boundary, were recorded simul- 
taneously at both stations, and on 13th and 14th May the transits of 21 stars 
were similarly recorded at the bomidary and at Melbourne Observatory. 
Exchange of time signals was effected also between the two Observatories 
of Melbourne and Sydney. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 369 

The results were as follow : — 

Difference of longitude — h. ni. s. 

Boundary-Sydney .. .. .. 40 59-72 

Boundary-Melbourne . . . . .. 16 3- 77 

Melbourne -Sydney .. .. ..0 24 55-81 

The adopted longitude for Melbourne was . . 9 39 54-80 

Tlie adopted longitude for Sydney was . . . . 10 4 48' 97 

The adopted longitude for Sydney was the mean of the value 
lOh. 4m. 47* 32s. calculated by Stone from Scott's lunar observations of 
1859 and 1860 (24), and the value found by applying the difference Sydney- 
Melbourne Oh. 24m. 55- 81s. to the longitude of Melbourne Observatory 
9h. 39m. 54- 8s. 

From these data, and the measurement, by chaining, of the short distance 
between Todd's transit instrument and the boundary, it was found that the 
north end of the marked boundary line was about 2J miles to the west of 
the 141st meridian. 

In the light of the present experience the longitude operations of 1868 
can hardly be regarded as fundamental, and, moreover, the adopted longitudes 
of the Observatories of Melbourne and Sydney being at the time entirely 
dependent on transit observations of the moon, were not entitled to great 
confidence. Yet the means and methods employed in this later determination 
were so far superior to those of 1839 that a considerable error in the position 
of this boundary line, amounting to probably more than 2 miles, could be 
accepted as a tolerably well ascertained fact. 

Then commenced the dispute between the adjoining States of South 
Australia and Victoria, the former claiming the strip of land upon which the 
latter State was encroaching. And the dispute grew even more vigorously 
after 1883, when the chain of telegraphically determined longitudes between 
Greenwich and Australia was completed; and further confirmed within 
sufficiently narrow limits the results of 1868. Eventually, in February, 
1911, the case was taken before the High Court of Australia, which decided 
that the marked boundary having been accepted as such by the two States 
concerned, the fact that it did not exactly coincide with the 141st meridian 
of east longitude did not warrant the Court in ordering the re-adjustment 
claimed by South Australia. 

In 1882 an arrangement was made between the British and Australian 
authorities that Captain L. Darwin, K.E., should go to Singapore for the 
purpose of carrying out, in co-operation with an Australian observer, who 
was to be stationed at Port Darwin, a determimition of the difference of 
longitude between the two places, by the exchange of clock signals through 
the cable lines of the Eastern Extension Company, thus completing the 
longitude chain Greenwich-Australia by the telegraphic method. 

The writer wassent to Port Darwin equipped with a transit instrument, by 
Troughton and Simms, of 3-in. aperture, clock, chronometers, and all necessary 
requisites. 

Captain Darwin, similarly provided with the necessary instruments, 
established his temporary Observatory at Singapore. 

Captain Holb^ of the Netherland India Staff of Batavia, was instructed 
by his Government to proceed to Banjoewangie, where the two brandies of 



370 Federal Handbook. 



8 


43 22 


49 


. 9 


14 20 


30 


. 9 


39 54 


14 


. 10 


4 49 


54 


. 9 


49 19 


80 



the cable between Port Darwin and Singapore join, and to take part in the 
longitude operations, so as to determine the intervals Banjoewangie-Singapore 
and Banjoewangie-Port Darwin, as well as the direct interval Singapore -Port 
Darwin. 

Clock signals were exchanged by Port Darwin with Banjoewangie on 
4 nights, with Singapore on 8 nights, wdth Adelaide on 6 nights, and with 
Melbourne on 4 nights, between the dates 28th January and 2nd March, 1883, 
inclusive. 

By these operations the meridian of Port Darwin became the origin of 
Australian longitudes, and the following results were obtained and adopted 
at the time (26): — 

h. m. s. 
Longitude of Port Darwin . . 
Longitude of Adelaide Observatory . . 
Longitude of Melbourne Observatory 
Longitude of Sydney Observatory 
Longitude of Hobart (Barrack Square) 
A comparison of the telegraphic values of 1883 with those derived by 
absolute methods up to that time showed a more satisfactory agreement than 
could reasonably be expected. 

Before dealing with the comparison, it will be necessary first to point out 
some results obtained by the method of occupations and culminations which 
have not yet been taken into account. 

Russell observed a large number of transits of the moon and moon 
culminating stars in the years 1863, 1871, 1872, 1873, and 1874, from which 
he derived the value lOh. 4m. 50* 81s. for the longitude of the Sydney 
Observatory, which he adopted from 1878. (29) 

More transits of the moon and a number of occupations were observed 
at the Melbourne Observatory in the years 1874-75 for further veri- 
fication of the adopted longitude, which confirmed the previously adopted 
value. 

Also, Mr. John Tebbutt had very regularly observed many occultations 
of stars by the moon, and laid great stress upon the superior value of 
this method for improving the longitude of the Sydney Observatory 
and his own. 

From 1863 to 1867 he had observed some 169 occultations, and 
by the end of the year 1878 had increased the number by 63 more, 
and having in the meantime determined the difference of longitude 
between his Observatory and that of Sydney, on several occasions, both 
by direct exchange of time signals telegraphically and by trans- 
portation of his chronometer, deduced the value of the longitude 
of Sydney Observatory based entirely on his own observations as 
follows : — 

h. m. s. 
Longitude of Windsor .. .. .. 10 3 21-81 

Difference Windsor-Sydney .. .. 1 28*83 



Longitude of Sydney Observatory .. 10 4 50*64 (30) 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 371 

In 1884 Dr. Auwers deduced a fundamental value of the longitude of the 
Sydney Observatory based on the Australian observations both of transits 
of the moon and occultations (31). He found longitude of — 

h. m. s. 
Sydney Observatory .. .. .. 10 4 49*60 

Melbourne Observatory .. .. .. 9 39 54-17 

Windsor Observatory . . . . .. 10 3 20* 77 

The comparison of results depending on the entire chain of telegraphic 
longitudes completed in 1883 with those derived by Dr. Auwers from lunar 
observations shows a discrepancy amounting to less than one-quarter of 
second of time, which was justly regarded as a nearly perfect agreement. 

Subsequent longitude operations in Australia until the year 1903 were 
confined to those specified as follow : — 

A re -determination in 1887 of the arcs Windsor-Melbourne and 
Windsor-Sydney by telegraph exchange of time signals which gave — 

m. s. 
Windsor-Sydney .. .. .. .. 1 29-39 

Windsor-Melbourne .. .. ..23 25-87 



Melbourne-Sydney computed .. .. 24 55-26 (32) 



A re-determination in 1887 of the interval Windsor-Sydney by transporta- 
tion of chronometer on seven different dates and by triangulation, giving two 
new values for this, are as follow : — - 

Windsor-Sydney — m. s. 

By transportation of chronometer .. 1 29-49 (18) 

By triangulation .. .. ..129-77 (32) 

Determinations of the longitude of the Brisbane Observatory, Queensland, 
by exchange of time signals telegraphically between Sydney and Brisbane in 
the years 1884, 1891, and 1892. 

Determination of the longitude of Broome, Fremantle, and Albany, 
Western Australia, in 1890 and 1891, by telegraphic exchange of clock signals 
between Commander Moore and Lieut. Parry at the above stations and the 
Adelaide Observatory. 

Determination of the longitude of the Perth Observatory in 1899 and 

1901 by exchange of clock signals telegraphically with Adelaide and Melbourne. 

The resulting longitude of the Perth Observatory being based on the 

value 9h. 14m. 20' 30s. for Adelaide and 91i. 39m. 54' 14s. for Melbourne, 

giving— 

Longitude of Perth Observatory — h. m. s. 

Fm Adelaide (1899) .. .. .. 7 43 21-74E. (33) 

Fm Melbourne (1899) .. .. .. 7 43 21-78E. (33) 

Fia Adelaide (1901) .. .. .. 74321-97E. (34) 

Determination of the longitude of a number of stations of the trigono- 
metrical surveys of the States of New South Wales, Queensland, and Western 
Australia by telegraph exchange of time signals with the respective State 
Observatories. 

The results of all these operations still depended on the value assigned to 
the longitude of tlie initial Ttieridian of Port Darwin in 1883. 



372 Federal Handbook. 



" The laying of the cable across the Pacific Ocean from Vancouver to 
Australia and New Zealand, some 8,273 nautical miles in length, was completed 
towards the end of the year 1902. It connects three intermediate stations 
on its course, namely. Fanning Island, Suva (Fiji), and Norfolk Island, and 
branches from Norfolk Island to Southport, in Queensland (Australia), and to 
Doubtless Bay (New Zealand)." (.35) 

" The importance of taking advantage of the first opportunity of deter- 
mining the difference of longitude between Canada and Australia, along this 
route, was quickly recognised by the Canadian astronomers who, having 
previously established a chain of longitudes across the Atlantic between 
Greenwich and Canada, could now continue the chain to Australia to meet 
the end of the chain carried eastward from Greenwich to Port Darwin, thus 
closing a complete longitude circuit round the earth." 

" The work having been authorized by the Canadian Government, 
Dr. Klotz, of the Ottawa Observatory, was commissioned to take charge 
of it, and in March, 1903, in conjunction with his assistant, Mr. F. "W. 0. 
Werry, B.A., Dr. Klotz commenced his great series of Trans-Pacific 
longitudes, which he concluded in January, 1904." 

The results of Dr. Klotz are as follow: — 
(.39) h. m. s. 

Adopted longitude of Vancouver .. .. 8 12 28-368 W. 

Interval Vancouver-Fanning Island . . 2 2-5 5* 406 

Interval Fanning Island-Suva (Fiji) .. 128 43-837 

Interval Suva-Norfolk Island .. .. 42 1-243 

Interval Norfolk Island-Southport (Queens- 
land) .. .. .. .. 58 1-364 



13 46 20-218 W. 
Longitude of Southport (Queensland) . . 10 13 39- 782 E. 



A second fundamental meridian was thus established in 1903 on the 
eastern coast of Australia, the longitude of which was based entirely on the 
telegraphic method, and was quite independent of any other Australian 
longitude previously determined. 

The arc Southport -Sydney having been measured by exchange of clock 
signals between Klotz and the officials of the Sydney Observatory, the entire 
circuit romid the earth was thus closed, and a comparison of the two 
independent values for Sydney, based on the eastward and westward chains 
from Greenwich, gave the closing error. 

At the time when the comparison was made (1903) a re-discussion of the 
Port D a nvin longitude, based on all available records up to 1894, had been 
made (36), according to which the adopted value 8h. 43m. 22- 49s. required 
to be reduced to 8h. 43m. 22- 34s. 

Also in the years 1894-96 the interval Greenwich-Madras was re-measured 
by Colonel Burrard and Colonel Lennox Conyngham, which involved a 
further reduction of 0-04s., and finally in 1903 a re-determination of the arc 
Greenwich-Potsdam and the re -adjustment of European longitudes by 
Dr. Albrecht and Prof. Wanach (37) (38) showed that the reduction had been 
carried too far by 0- 01s. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 373 

The values adopted by Klotz in his comparison were — 

Longitude of Sydney — h. m. s. 

Fid Eastern chain from Greenwich .. 10 4 49 '355 

Fid Canada and Trans-Pacific longitudes 10 4 49 "287 



Closing error = 1 • 02" = 84 feet = . . "068 (39) 

On the basis of all data available at the present time, the most probable 

longitude values of those Australian stations which form part of the Canadian 

circuit may be assumed to be — , 

•' 11. m. s. 

Longitude of Port Darwin . . .. .. 8 43 22-28 E. 

Longitude of Melbourne Observatory .. 9 39 53*93 E. 

Longitude of Sydney Observatory . . .. 10 4 49-33 E. 

Southport (Queensland) .. ' .. .. 10 13 39-82 E. 

Notwithstanding the remarkable agreement of independent results ob- 
tained by absolute and telegraphic methods in the determination of Australian 
longitudes, and the powerful check afforded by the closing error of the Trans- 
Pacific chain, it has been pointed out (35) that such evidence cannot as yet 
be accepted as the measure of the accuracy of the last longitude values just 
given above ; and that a re -measurement of the intervals Southport-Sydney, 
Sydney-Melbourne, Melbourne-Port Darwin, Port Darwin-Singapore, Singa- 
pore-Madras is required before these values can be adopted with full confidence. 
The Commonwealth Government is desirous of establishing a primary 
meridian to which all the Australian longitudes should be referred for the 
purpose of connecting the various surveys of the States to a common 
meridian datum. The present Federal Observatory of Mt. Stromlo is indicated 
3.S the appropriate point for the primary meridian of Australia. Lideed, 
this was one of the reasons for which Mt. Stromlo was selected as the site for 
the Observatory. This point could be very readily connected with one of the 
■existing Observatories — Melbourne or Sydney — telegraphically or geodetically, 
but it has been suggested to the authorities (35) that adequate precision in 
the determination of the longitude of this meridian could only be obtained 
by completing a system of longitude measurements connecting Mt. Stromlo 
directly with the end of the Trans-Pacific chain at Southport on one side, 
and vnth. the end of the Indian chain at Port Darwin on the other, and by 
re-measuring the intervals Port Darwin-Singapore and Singapore -IVIadras. 

Great stress has been laid on the importance of carrying out this work 
soon and with due e fficiency, in order to strengthen Australian longitudes . 

The Mt. Stromlo Observatory. 

In the beginning of the year 1910 the Government of the Commonwealth 
decided to erect a temporary Observatory at Mt. Stromlo, within the Federal 
Territory, at a distance of 7 miles to the westward of the centre of the Federal 
Capital " Canberra." 

The immediate object was to test by astronomical and meteorological 
observations extending over one year, whether the atmospheric conditions 
of the site were sufiiciently favorable to justify the authorities to establish on 
that site a permanent Astronomical Observatory of the highest order. 

In due course an appropriate structure was constructed for the instal- 
lation of a 9-in. refracting telescope equatorially mounted, and periodica 1 
■observations were made for a few days in each month for nearly two years. 



374 Federal Handbook. 



at the end of which (July, 1913) the observers reported that the site was 
favorable for the intended purpose . 

The selected site is the summit of a group of hills rising, by gentle and 
graceful slopes, to an elevation of some 600 feet above the general surface of 
the surrounding country, and 2,660 above sea level. It commands an 
uninterrupted view practically down to the horizon on all sides, it affords 
ample room for a great institution, and its orientation, in respect of the city 
and of the prevailing winds, is favorable. 

The temporary building consists of a central dome, 18 feet in diameter, 
resting on a circular wall of concrete, 8 feet above the floor, and four small 
square rooms symmetrically placed north, south, east, and west for the 
accommodation of the observers and caretaker. 

The Oddie telescope, which has already been noted in connexion with the 
private Observatory of Mt. Pleasant, Ballarat, is the principal instrument. 
It has an object glass of 9-in. aperture giving excellent definition. The 
telescope is mounted on a massive cast-iron stand, resting on a pier of 
concrete built on a granite foundation. A metallic camera is attached in 
which is fitted one of Dallmeyer's portrait lens of 6-in. diameter and 
38 inches focal length. The instrument is provided with a fine driving 
clock, excellent filar micrometer, electric illumination for dark or bright 
field, an Evershed prominence spectroscope made by Hilger, and every 
requisite for all classes of observations. The eye pieces range in power from 
60 to 700. 

This instrument was presented to the Commonwealth Government by the 
late Mr. James Oddie, of Ballarat, in July, 1910. I was commissioned to 
take delivery of it at Ballarat, and to erect it at Mt. Stromlo for the object 
stated above. As the instrument had never been taken out of its packing 
cases since the maker sent it out to Australia a quarter of a century before, 
it required a great deal of overhauling, and also several alterations and 
additions, which were done at the Melbourne Observatory. 

The installation of the instrimient at Mt. Stromlo was completed in 
September, 1911, after which observations were commenced and continued 
by myself and my chief assistant. Dr. J. Baldwin, during fifteen visits to the 
locality between 8th September, 1911, and 2nd June, 1913, each visit 
occupying about a week. 

The observations were visual, photographic, and spectroscopic. 

The visual observations were by naked eye and telescope. 

The naked-eye observations were made for estimating the amount of 
scintillation at different altitudes, comparison of star regions, parts of the 
Milky Way, the Magellanic clouds, clusters, and nebulae. The telescopic 
observations included close double stars and detail of planetary surfaces. 
With the 6-in. doublet lens a series of photographs of rich star regions and 
nebulae was obtained. 

The observation and delineation of solar prominences were also regularly 
carried out. 

At the conclusion of our programme, I reported the result that in my 
opinion, taking into account all the circumstances, the site was decidedly 
suitable for an Astronomical Observatory of the highest order. 

The question of proceeding with the establishment of a permanent Federal 
Observatory at this site is at present under consideration. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 375 

(2) GEODESY. 
(a) Trigonometrical Surveys of High Precision. 

Though mauy careful surveys have been effected iu Australia, chiefly 
with a view to laud settlement, trigonometrical surveys of high precision 
are, so far, confined to the three Eastern States. Of these only a brief 
description will now be given. 

Queensland. 

The trigonometrical survey in this State extends approximately from 
26° 30' to 29° 30' south latitude, and from 151° 15' to 153° 15' east longitude. 
It comprises 74 triangles and a base line of about 7 miles in length situated 
at Jondaryan. Its terminals are Mount Irving and Mount Maria, which are 
respectively 216 and 162 feet above the general level of the intervening ground. 

The measurement of this base was made in 1884 by means of two steel 
tapes 100 feet long, about half-an-inch broad, and 0*01 inch thick. 

These were compared with a standard bar of steel octagonal in section 
1| inches in diameter and 10 feet long, which was kept floating when in use 
in a trough of mercury, with thermometers plunged in it for obtaining the 
temperature of the bar. This bar was compared in 1883 with the New South 
Wales Standard Bar 0.1.4, which gave its standardized length at 62° F. as 
9*9998581 feet, which value was adopted throughout the operations of the 
trigonometrical survey. 

In the base measurements the two tapes were placed " in wooden troughs 
and shaded by a board, a tension of 20 lbs. was applied by means of a spring 
balance, and five thermometers, whose index errors had been determined 
by comparison with a standard thermometer, were used along each 100 feet 
of tape. The troughs were supported upon pegs driven in the ground and set on 
even grade by means of a levelling instrument. Marks were made in copper 
discs inserted in the pegs at each hundred feet, the distance between the 
tape ends and the marks being measured by micrometer microscopes. 

Ten sections, the six central ones averaging nearly 1 mile and the other 
two at each end being nearly half-a-mile mile long. 

The terminal points of these sections were marked by stones sunk into the 
ground and set in concrete. Each stone had a metal plug, upon which a 
small mark was made denoting the terminal point of the section." 

Three measurements were made with each tape, giving six independent 
values. 

The two sets of three values made with each tape gave two mean results, 
which showed a difference of 0" 117 inches. 

Ten-inch theodolites (Everest pattern), by Troughton and Simms, provided 
with micrometer microscopes reading to one second of arc, were generally 
employed on the survey, and a 12-in. altazimuth was used at a few stations. 

The angular measurements were obtained from two to eight readings 
made on each of eleven positions of the circle. The closing errors were 
within 1" for 29 triangles, from 1" to 2" for 29 other triangles, from 2" to 3" for 
11 triangles, and upwards of 3" for the remaining 5 triangles. The greatest 
closing error was 3 •90", and the average 0'95." 

" The astronomical datum is the position of the station at Jimbour as 
determined by Captain Morris, R.E., and Lieut. Darwin, R.E., in 1882," 
while they occupied this station for the observation of the transit of Venus. 



376 Federal Handbook. 



The longitude was determined by direct exchange of time signals with the 
Sydney Observatory by telegraph. In deducing from this datum the latitudes 
and longitudes of the trigonometrical stations, the elements used by Colonel 
James in the Ordnance Survey of Great Britain, in 1858, were adopted. 

The azimuth datum was determined by astronomical observations 
made with a 20-in. transit instrument at Bloodwood, this being the apex 
of one of the triangles standing on the base line . 

Astronomical observations for latitude and longitude were also made 
at several stations. 

A comparison of the astronomical with the geodetic values for the four 
stations of Bloodwood, Brisbane, Haystack, and Mount Domville gives the 
following differences respectively. (40) 

Latitude (geodetic -astronomical) --02"; +M7''; +5-37"; -M7". 
Longitude (geodetic -astronomical) + 6 "57"; -O^OS". 

A minor triaugulation of the City of Brisbane was carried out in 1890. 

The principal triangulation was discontinued in 1891. 

Victoria. 

The preliminary work of clearing mountain tops for a trigonometrical 
survey of the State of Victoria was commenced in 1853 imder Captain Andrew 
Clark, R.E., after his appointment as Surveyor-Greneral of Victoria, as 
already mentioned ; but the primary triangulation was not actually commenced 
till seven years after. 

In 1860 a base line was laid down on the Werribee Plains about 4* 942 miles 
in length, which was subsequently extended by triangulation to a further 
length of 5*651 miles, making a total distance between the terminal points 
10-593 miles. 

" Each end of the measured base was defined by a solid mass of masonry 
built 5 feet into the ground, capped by a heavy stone with gun-metal plug 
and platinum centre, on which the terminal dot was marked. A heavy 
protection stone was placed over the cap stone, and this was surmounted 
by a timber pyramid, with pinnacle accurately centred over the platinum 
point." (41) 

The measurement of this base was made by three iron bars 10 feet long 
and 1 inch square, with the ends turned roimd for about 4 inches in length, 
one end of each bar being finished quite flat and polished, and the other end 
being a segment of a sphere of 5-ft. radius, also polished. They were encased 
in wooden troughs 6 inches square, with hinged tops cut in three sections for 
the convenient examination of the three thermometers resting on each bar, 
the steel ends only being freely exposed 2| inches out of the case. 

The lengths of these bars were compared with due care " with a 10-ft. 
ordnance standard lent by the New South Wales Government " (40) and 
verified later by a similar standard obtained by the Government of Victoria 
from the Ordnance Survey Department of England. 

In the actual measurement the bars were supported on pine trestles fitted 
with brass sockets on their top frames to receive a brass tripod. These 
frames carried a brass " camel," provided with the requisite fittings for 
bringing the ends of the bars accurately into juxtaposition. The three bars 
were placed in series with distances of about J inch between the spherical 



ASTROXOMY AND GeODESY, 377 

end of one and the flat end of another, and the distance between the two 
was obtained by passing between them a graduated wedge of hard bell-metal 
7 inches long and 2 inches broad, with faces inclined at angle of one-half a 
degree . 

The difference of level between the terminal of the base being only 14 
feet, and the intervening ground being fairly flat, the bars were adjusted by 
levelling into a horizontal position throughout the measurement. 

A part of the southern portion of this base was re-measured to the extent 
of 2- 11 miles, and the difference between the two results was foimd to be 0' 308 
inches, which was sufficiently small " to justify the assumption that by the 
original measurement the Werribee base was probably as accurate as any 
measured up to that time." (40) 

The lengths of this base are as follow : — 
(41) Measured base .. .. .. 2G091-82feet 

Extension bv triangulation to Green Hill 

terminal 29839-83 „ 



Total length .. .. .. 55931-65 „ 

The instruments used for angular observations were an 18-in. altazimuth, 
by Troughton and Simms, and a 13-in. theodolite, by Ertel, both being 
provided with micrometer microscopes by which the circles were read to 
1" ; two 12-in. theodolites read by micrometer microscopes to 4''' and 10" 
respectively ; a 10-in. altazimuth and other theodolites of smaller size. 

The triangulation was expanded in a decade throughout the extent of the 
Colony south of the 36th parallel of south latitude. 

In this survey 209 stations of the first order, 267 of the second order, and 
a larger number of subsidiary points were connected and marked. 

An average number of 170 observations were made at each of the primary 
stations to determine their positions. The triangulated area is about 
70,000 square miles. 

It was intended to measure a very suitable base of verification to the 
westward of Mount Gambler and Moimt Schanck, in South Australia, these 
being the extreme western points connected with Victorian triangulation, but 
the work was not carried out. 

A portion of the boundary line between the States of New South Wales 
and Victoria is a straight line running from a point near the source of the 
Murray River to Cape Howe on the east coast. The terminals of this line 
were agreed upon in 1870, and in order to determine their geographical 
co-ordinates with all possible accuracy, they were connected with the primary 
triangulation which was, for this purpose, extended to " The Pilot " and 
Mount Kosciusko, in New South Wales, these being the extreme eastern 
points of the survey. 

The true azimuth of the line having been deduced by calculation from the 
co-ordinates of the terminal points, the line was ranged on the ground to the 
computed bearing and marked in 1872, starting from one marked terminal, 
and reaching the coast to within 17 inches of the other marked terminal. 

The line was run by Messrs. A. C. Allen and A. Black, and the result is a 
fitting tribute to their skill, energy, and endurance in the accomplishment 
of an exceedingly difficult undertaking with such a remarkable success. 



378 Federal Handbook. 



Colonel Clarke's elements of the figure of the earth were used in working 
out the results of the Victorian survey. 

New South Wales. 

The territory of this State extends from the Murray River to the 29th 
parallel of south latitude, and from the eastern coast westward to the 141st 
nieridian of east longitude. 

About one-fourth of its whole area has been covered with a trigonometrical 
survey of high precision, which was initiated in 1867, carried on for a few 
years, suspended for some time, resumed in 1891, continued since over an 
extent of 43 million acres, and still progressing. 

The base line of this survey, 5| miles in length, is situated at Lake George, 
and a verification base of about 7 miles was laid down and measured at 
Richmond. 

The survey comprises 119 stations of the first order, 583 of the second order, 
and 1 ,380 of the third order, all of which have been very substantially and 
permanently marked and comiected, and whose geodetic co-ordinates are 
accurately known. 

Some 490 additional stations have been piled and prepared for observation, 
of which 15 are to be ranked as first order, 75 second order, and 400 third 
order stations. 

The stations of the first order constitute the primary skeleton of the 
survey, being a net of fundamental triangles whose sides range usually from 
35 to 40 miles in length. 

Astronomical observations for azimuth, latitude and longitude were made 
at many of these primary stations. 

The second order stations are distributed at distances varying from 15 to 
20 miles, this being the average length of the sides of the secondary triangles. 
These stations were connected by actual observations made upon them with 
smaller instruments than those used at primary stations, but with sufficient 
precision to meet all the practical requirements of a triangulation for the 
purpose of accurate mapping. No astronomical observations were made 
at these stations. 

The sides of triangles comiecting stations of the third order are 
from 7 to 10 miles. The positions of these stations were fijxed by inter- 
sections based on observations made from surrounding stations of higher 
order, and their accuracy is sufficient for connecting all chain surveys on a 
uniform system. 

The original base on Lake George was laid down and its measurement 
■commenced in 1868, under the superintendence of Mr. G. R. Smalley, but it 
was abandoned before completion o^ving to an abnormal rise of the water 
of the lake, which covered parts of the line to a depth of 2 feet. 

A new site for the base was selected in 1870 by Mr. P. F. Adams, the 
Surveyor-General at the time, under whose direction the measurement of its 
length was made t^vice by Mr. A. C. Betts. 

The adopted standard of length was that of " Standard Bar 0.1.4." 
referred to at p. 175 of Colonel Clarke's work on the comparison of standards 
published in 1866." (41) 

This bar is of cast iron, 10 feet in length, the length being defined by 
microscopical dots marked near its ends. It is encased, and fitted with 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 379 

adequate support to prevent flexure, and provided with thermometers and 
micrometer microscopes for the observation of its marks. It was obtained 
many years before from the Board of Ordnance in England. 

The actual measurement of the base was made with three 10-ft. bars of 
pine wood, encased and evenly supported, in wooden troughs 6 inches by 
6 inches, and a little less than 10 feet in length, so as to allow a short portion 
of the ends of the bars to project outside. The ends were fitted with small 
brass plugs, upon each of which a terminal microscopic dot was marked, the 
distance between the terminal dots being the actual length of the bar. These 
lengths were standardized each morning and evening during the progress 
of the work by comparison with the Standard Bar 0.1.4. 

Each trough was supported on two " camels " provided with vertical, 
lateral, and longitudinal motion by means of which the three bars could be 
accurately placed in series along the line with the terminal dots of adjacent 
bars arranged in close pairs, always at the same distance, leaving a small 
constant amount of free space between the bars. This adjustment was made 
by means of a double microscope attached to the leading end of each trough. 
The microscope consisted of a single tube with two objectives at one end, 
rigidly mounted side by side, and two parallel webs, fixed on a diaphragm, 
at the upper end of the tube in the common focal plane of the objectives. 
By adequate means of adjustment the pair of dots could be brought in the 
fields of view and adjusted so as to bring each image into accurate bisection 
with each respective wire. The adjustment for parallelism of the optical 
axes and the distance between the webs having been previously ascertained, 
it was assumed that a constant distance between the adjacent bars was 
maintained throughout the measurement. 

" The difierence between the length of this base as found from the measure- 
ment and re -measurement was 0'542 inches in the total length of 5|- miles." 

The verification base at Richmond was measured in 1879-80 by Mr. 
Conder twice. 

The first measurement was made with the same three pine bars with which 
the Lake George base was measured, and in the second three 10-ft. rods of 
steel I of an inch in diameter were used. These rods were wrapped in blankets, 
and encased in wooden troughs with glass windows for inspection of the 
attached thermometers. The arrangement of terminal dots, the auxiliary 
apparatus for support, adjustment, and observations, and the methods 
employed in carrying out the work were in every respect similar for both 
sets of bars, and throughout the base operations at Lake George in 1870 and 
at Richmond in 1879-80. The length of both sets of bars was again 
standardized by daily comparison morning and evening with the same 
standard as adopted in 1870, namely, the Ordnance Bar 0.1.4 

The results of the two measurements were as follow : — 
By pine bars.. .. .. 36989-33651 feet 

By steel rods .. ..36989-39166 „ 



Difference .. .. 0-05515 „ = 0-662 inches 



" The combined error of measurement of the two bases and of the inter- 
vening triangiilation produced an apparent discrepancy of only If inches in 
the length of the Lake George base. Tlie bases were assumed to be correct, 

C. 121.54. 2 b 



380 Federal Handbook. 



and an adjustment of the triangles was made in order to eliminate this small 
apparent difference." (40) 

The instruments employed in astronomical observations and angular 
measurements were as follow : — 

Two altazimuth instrmnents by Troughton and Simms, with object glasses 
of 3-in. aperture, provided with filar micrometer and delicate levels for latitude 
determinations by the Talcott method ; circles read by four micrometer 
microscopes to 1". 

All observations, astronomical and geodetical, were made with these 
instruments at the primary stations. 

Theodolite by Troughton and Simms, object glass 2|-in. aperture and 
26 inches focal length, horizontal circle 10 inches in diameter read by two 
micrometer microscopes to 1", and two parts of a vertical circle 10 inches in 
diameter reading by vernier to 5". 

Observations at second order stations, and all vertical angles for the 
determination of relative heights, were made with this instrument. 

Recently a 10-in. Repsold theodolite, of the same pattern as that used in 
the trigonometrical survey of South Africa, was procured, and is intended to 
be employed in the future in place of the heavier 18-in. altazimuth. 

The observed directions from a primary station to another station of the 
first and second order depended on twenty pointings made in reversed 
positions of the instrument. 

The number of pointings was reduced to ten for second order stations, 
and to five for stations of the third order. 

The great accuracy of these observations is shown by the following state- 
ment of the closing error of triangles. 

In 171 triangles in which all angles have been observed with the large 
altazimuth the closing error is • 70". 

In 235 triangles, with two angles only observed with the larger, and one 
angle observed with the smaller instrument the average closing error is 1 • 15". 

In 245 triangles, in which only one angle was observed ■^nth the 18" alt- 
azimuth, and the other two with the 10" theodolite, the closing error is 1-29". 

In 173 triangles, with all the angles observed with the smaller instrument 
the closing error is 1 • 30". 

The probable value of the average closing error of the triangles, computed 
according to General Ferrero's formula, for the primary triangulation of New 
South Wales is " 54", which is less than the error similarly computed for the 
great trigonometrical surveys of Great Britain, India, and most of the other 
countries, and the closing error for triangles observed with the smaller 
instruments is, on the same criterion, reduced to 1 "OO". 

Astronomical observations for latitudes were made at 74 stations with the 
18" altazimuth by the Talcott method. 

Azimuth was determined at 66 stations by meridian observations of 
circumpolar stars, made with the same instrument. 

The longitude of 10 primary stations, and of 29 other important places 
in the State, were determined by the direct exchange of clock signals with the 
Sydney Observatory. 

For the calculation of geodetic latitudes and longitudes, the co-ordinates 
of the Sydney Observatory adopted as the datum were : — Latitude 33° 51' 41 • 1" ; 
longitude 141° 12' 23-1". 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 381 

The elements of the figure of the earth adopted in the calculations of the 
survey are those of a spheroid with — Major axis a = 20923134 feet ; polar 
c = 20853429 feet. 

Minor triangulations have been made around such important centres of 
the State as Sydney, Albury, and Newcastle, which were afterwards 
connected with the primary system. 

Since the expansion of the geodetic survey of this State from the Lake 
George base in 1876, the principal observers in charge of the work were 
Messrs. W. J. Condor and J. Brooks. It was the former who set the high 
standard of accuracy which was worthily maintained by the latter. 

Mr. T. F. Furber has been Director of the Survey for many years, and to 
him is due much of the credit of having planned means and methods by 
which this important undertaking has been brought to its present state of 
general efficiency and exemplary precision. 

Mr. Furber, in his valuable paper (40) fi'om which the information required 
for the above account was mainly drawn, mentions the names of P. F. Adams, 
late Surveyor-General, " to whom the very existence of the survey is in a 
large measure due," and the late H. C. Eussell, who, during the whole progress 
of the survey, aided in many ways where his scientific attainments were of 
the greatest service. 

In May, 1912, a Conference was held in Melbourne at which the Director 
of Commonwealth Lands and Surveys, the Surveyor-General, and the 
Government Astronomer of New Zealand, and the Surveyors-General of the 
Australian States met to discuss, among other things, the question of a 
Geodetic Survey of Australia. 

The following resolutions bearing on this matter were passed by the 
Conference : — 

(41) " That, in the opinion of this Conference, it is desirable that a 
Geodetic Survey of Australia should be undertaken. 

" That, in order to give effect to the foregoing resolution, this Con- 
ference respectfully recommends that such survey be undertaken by the 
Commonwealth Government, and submits in support thereof the following 
reasons : — 

" (a) That the time has arrived when the Commonwealth should take 
its place in the scientific investigations of the world, not the 
least important of which are the determination of the figure of 
the earth, its density, and other cognate matters. 
" (6) That work of this character, involving the highest form of survey^ 
should be effected under the supreme authority of Australia, 
as it is essential that it should be carried out with the greatest 
degree of accuracy on a uniform basis and a definite plan the 
individual parts being co-ordinated and eventually forming one 
homogeneous whole. 
" (c) That the system which has hitherto prevailed by which the 
individual States carried out this work with instruments of 
varying character has resulted in divergent standards of 
accuracy, rendering the work to a great extent unsatisfactory, 
and, though much of it is of high grade, portions of it are 
impossible of reconciliation and co-ordination with a continental 
scheme. 

2 B 2 



382 Federal Handbook. 



" {d) That the desirableness of this work being undertaken by the 
Commonwealth Government is evidenced by the fact that the 
Geodetic Survey of the United States is carried out under the 
direct control of the Federal Government, and that the South 
African Geodetic Survey is also under one central control. 
" (e) That such survey is absolutely necessary for the production of 
accurate maps, will be of high value in connexion with cadastral 
and geological surveys, and form a basis for topographical 
work for defence and other purposes. It will, moreover, provide 
a standard of accuracy for surveys of every description through- 
out the Commonwealth. 
" (J) That it will afiord an invaluable base to which settlement surveys 
already effected can be connected, providing data for re 
establishing boundaries, which, with increasing density of- 
settlement, becomes a matter of great importance. Further, 
as regards the sparsely occupied areas of Australia, such a survey, 
if carried out in advance of settlement, will be of the greatest 
utility and assistance in effecting the settlement surveys which 
can at any future time be reproduced with a minimum error 
and at a relatively low cost, preventing litigation consequent 
upon other methods." 
It is earnestly to be hoped that the Commonwealth Government will 
sanction the recommendations of this Conference, and that the proposed 
undertaking may be carried out, so as to enable Australia to furnish in due 
course a contribution which should prove itself to be one of the greatest 
value and importance for the advancement of modern geodesy. 

(b) Pendulum Observations. 

Determinations of the gravitational value of " g " have been made in 
Australia at various times by different observers, since the early years of the 
nineteenth century, generally, by differential methods based on the swings of 
pendulums of the " invariable " type, and, in one case, by the actual measure- 
ment of a " second's pendulum " of the reversible or Bessell's type. 

The earliest gravimetric observations made in Australia seem to be those 
of the French Expedition under Freycinet, who swung three pendulums at 
Sydney in 1819, and the latest are those of Dr. Wright, of Canada, which he 
made at Melbourne in April of this year (1913) on his return from Scott's 
Antarctic Expedition. 

During this period of 95 years, the value of " g " has been determined at 
all the capitals of Australasia one or more times independently, forming a 
series of 24 results, 9 of which are for Sydney, 7 for Melbourne, 1 for Brisbane, 
1 for Perth, 1 for Hobart, 4 for New Zealand, and 1 for Campbell Island. 

The whole of this work has been discussed by the International Geodetic 
Association, and a summary of it, with brief descriptions of the observations 
made, apparatus employed, and estimated probable error of each result, is 
published in the Reports of the 13th, lith, loth, and lUh Conferenz der 
internalionalen Erdmessung, from which the appended table is taken.- 

The table shows, by the satisfactory agreement of the values obtained 
by several observers at different times, that the gravitational constant 
" g " has been well ascertained for the Australian stations. 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 



383 



H 

03 

>H 

CO 

s 

P 
oa 

O 

a 
w 

o 

EH 

fl 
P^ 
O 

t3 
O 

K 
« 



O 

> 

H 
W 
H 

|i< 

O 



1-3 

H 

P 



O 

l-H 

s 
» 

w 

w 



t 
^o 


Tj< ^ lO IC 00 eq <M ■* 00 (N «0 to (M O ^ CO CO -H OS O O t- 


1 


ICCC^at- -(MCOfMC^IC^I ^-^OStOCOiOC^OTttiOiOlM • 


^c^ 


1 +++ ++++++++++++++++++ 




«lMOQ0S3U':)Tt'*-*-*-*-*Tl<-^-*Tt(-*-*^^'*Tj<O 




oooc 30(NS<it^t^t-t^i>t-c-rtcococoMJ<ocorcec<M 


>^ 


(MT^OOOOC-TtCJOSlClSJCSOiO-OOOCDCOOOO-H 


^oc;c:cr. oc5C:S5c:=50 0;C5c;ocsoc50iCiOc; • 




oCoci>l:^tr-Xt^t^t:^t^t>r^t>t^t^l>I>l>r^t^t^c-t~ 




ci o c; o C5 c: c: c; ci c; c: c; c: c: c; o o o c; C5 C5 o c. 




c: ■* ui ~5 ro « ;= 00 (M o o O c^ -t 1- r~ 1- >-- ~: o -* :s 




M -H i.o o U5 CO O C5 C t^ — C: -M C: c: X O r: X c: 00 


^o 


IN lo c; o Tfi o oi c. o c; C5 ci t^ — — — t~ •-: --o -J o -^ 


— O c: C5 . o O c; o o ci s; S5 -. C-. C-. =^ -. c: C-. s: C5 c: • 




XXt^t^ XXt^t^GCt^t-t^t^t-t^t^l-t-t^t-I^t- 




a c. c-. a c: c: c; c; c: cr. c. s: o C5 cr. c: Ci c: r; <r. c; o 




r*. tJ* 




O 05 


^ 


'fCic-icoccr-coco -f— irfios5'*xco-*coi>THooio 


a 


t^-HXc:o3:-oo «o;ooo-^cq^cic5oa500050 


o 
>< 




^g„^_^^^ ^^^^^^g^^^^^^^^ 




C5 X 












<D 




b 


h 


o . 


> 


C3 : : : : : :::::. :^ 


9 




s 

o 


^ gta ^:2-3^§5-ol§1^- -ro o 










COCOXMC:-^tM— i~:i>-HU-OSOCOt-OOOOOTl(r-<lOOOTi< 




CO — CO-^CO-^-JCiCiCit-XX-HCiXt-OXt^OOt-Tjtt- 


&> 


C^lOClClXTfOOClCiOOlCSt-O-.OOO^COCOO-teO 


-HOOC505OOOC5C5050i0iC;CSC:S>05ClC20105C5O 




ooooi>t^t^xooi>i>t^i>t^t^t-i:^r-t-ir-c-t>i>r-t^i> 




C!0305C5a5C5OOC2C505C503C2C3C5C;OS:e53;C3C505 


S 




a sqMOcoi>oo«®c£iocot^t^eocococococofOcocoooo 

a ~— OO lO r^ IM ^ IM C<) <N (N CO Tt< Tf( Tt< •* ■* --if -!(H ■* lO 




W 






M (M O »0 ICOIOO I>-*Tj<TJHTJ(-*l>COlO 


c* 




s 


V OO t- O 35 (N C5 00 C5 00 X 00 00 coco <M <M (N Cq (M iM <N nH O 


05eO-^Tti<MlMirt>CilO»OOiO»0'-^^^^rt^-H-H— lO 




oooooooooooooooooooooooo 




0(M"*^COI>'*'*Tj('*Tl<Ti<Tf— 1— (^^-H— 1 — — — ICOlO 


3 


COI>t-I>l>'*'#-*TtiTjHrt<T)<Ti(>OiOOOiaiCioi-Oi--5 0— 1 




t-xc:5C5cooc505C5C5c:5 35o;oi>t>i>i>t^t^t-i>0^ 






•s 


fO — ^OC5COC505C5C5C:C-. C5-HP-H-H — — -H-H-H — 00I> 


3 


cocoioiowicTjHTf-^TtH^-^-^ooioioioioi-oicioiMio 


Im 


oooooooooooooooooooooooo 


"S 


(McooO'fe^t-r-t-t-t-t-t-cocococococoeococot-^ 


S 


lOT)<C0COCO-*C0C0C0C0C0C0C0C0COeOC0C0COC0C0C0(NCO 

1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 




::::: :^ :::::::::::::::: : 




2^^ 


a 


f^t> ■'■§ 


1 








oo-< QMS (ff WfiH 





384 Federal Handbook. 



The values in the table are from Bericht iiber die relativen Messungen der 
Schwerkraft mit Pendelapparaten in der Zeit von 1808 bis 1909 E. Borrasa 
Verhandlungen 16ten allgemeinen Conferenz der internationalen Erdmessung. 

In the table " 5' " is the observed value reduced to the Potsdam system. 

Writing <f) the latitude, H the height in metres, 6 the density of the local 
earth formation, g' -g the topographical reduction, then 

Oo = 9 + 3086 X 10 H the value reduced to sea-level. 

3 d 

9o ^ 5'o + iO^Qo^ '^ 9 ~9 *^^ value corrected for the 

4 X 5*52 

protuberant earth, 
y^ = 978-030 [1 + 0*005302 sin^ (/, - 0-000007 sin^ 2 ^] the value 

computed from Helmert's formula. 
gj - y^ — the gravitational anomaly. 

I am indebted to the Grovernment Astronomers and Surveyors-General 
of the Australian States for supplying me with accounts of the work of their 
respective departments ; to Professor Ernest Scott and iVIr. H. Wright for 
interesting historical notes on the astronomical work of early navigators ; to 
Messrs. J. Tebbutt, C. J. Merfield, W. Gale, and H. Wright for information 
in regard to amateur astronomy ; to Dr. J. M. Baldwin for arranging the 
results of pendulum observations ; to Mr. J. A. Maroney for preparing the 
list of papers in Appendix B, and for giving valuable assistance in looking up 
authorities ; and to some others who have helped me in various ways. To 
all of these I tender my sincere thanks. 

The length of the original article far exceeded the limits of space 
prescribed by the Editor, and owing to my inability to deal with the 
difficulty. Dr. E. F. J. Love undertook the heavy and troublesome task of 
reducing to its present size, for which I am very greatly obliged to him. 



(3) APPENDIX A. 



LIST OF REFERENCES. 

Corresponding to the numbers (1) to (41) as quoted in the Text. 

(1) Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science. Vol. 8. Melbourne 

Meeting, 1900 ; Inaugural address by R. L. J. EUery. 

(2) Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science. Vol. 1. Sydney 

Meeting, 1888 : Section A. H. C. Russell — " Astronomical and Meteorological 
Workers in New South Wales, 1778 to 1860." 

(3) Professor Ernest Scott, Life of Flinders. 

(4) Catalogue of 7,385 stars prepared from observations made in the years 1822 to 

1826 at the Observatory at Parramatta, New South Wales, founded by Lieut.- 
General Sir Thomas Macdougall Brisbane ; the Computations made, and the 
Catalogue constructed by Mr. William Richardson. (London. 1835.) 

(5) Memoirs of the Roj'al Astronomical Society. Vol. 3. 

(6) H. C. RusseU. The Sydney Observatory : History and Progress. (Sydney. 1882.) 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 385 

Appendix A. — List op References — continued. 

(7) Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society. Vol. 8, p. 251. 

(8) J. G. Galle. Verzeichniss der Elemente der bisher berechneten Cometenbahen. 

(Leipzig. 1894.) 

(9) Astronomical Observations made at the Sydney Observatory in the year 1859 by 

W. Scott, M.A. (Sydney. 1860.) 

(10) John Tebbiitt. On the Progress and present State of Astronomical Science in New 

South Wales. (From the Industrial Progress of New South Wales, 1870, p. 617.) 

(11) Melbourne Observatory. Astronomical Results. Vol 1. (Melbourne. 1869.) 

(12) Victoria. Sixth Report of the Board of Visitors to the Observatory. (Melbourne. 

1870.) 

(13) Observations of the Southern Nebulae made with the Great Melbourne Telescope 

from 1869 to 188>. Part I. (Melbourne. 1885.) 

(14) Royal Observatory Greenwich ; Photo- heliograph Results, 1874-1885. (Edinburgh. 

1907.) 

(15) South Australia. Report on the Post Office, Telegraph, and Observatory Depart- 

ments, by Charles Todd, C.M.G., F.R.A.S., Adelaide, 1896, p. 194. 

(16) Private Communication from H. B. Curlewis. Esq., Acting Government Astronomer 

of Western Australia. 

(17) John Tebbutt. History and Description of Mr. Tebbutt's Observatory, Windsor, 

New South Wales. (Sydney. 1887.) 

(18) John Tebbutt. Astronomical Memoirs (Sydney. 1908.) 

(19) Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. Vol. 25, p. 197. 

(20) Astronomische Nachrichten. Vol. 64, p. 109. 

(21) Observations of the Transit of Venus, 9th December, 1874, made at Stations in 

New South Wales. (H. C. Russell.) Sydney. 1892.) 

(22) Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. Vol. 44, p. 310. 

(23) Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. Vol. 20, p. 77. 

(24) Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. Vol. 27, p. 299. 

(25) Astronomical and Meteorological Observations made at the Sydney Observatory 

in the year 1860 by W. Scott, M.A. (Sydney. 1861.) 

(26) R. L. J, Ellery, C. Todd, and H. C. Russell. Report on the Telegraphic Determina- 

tion of Australian Longitudes via Singapore, Banjoewangie, and Port Darwin. 
(Melbourne. 1886.) 

(27) Victoria. Third Report of the Board of Visitors to the Observatory, with the 

Annual Report of the Government Astronomer. (Melbourne. 1863.) 

(28) South Australia. Observatory and Telegraphs. Annual Report by Charles Todd, 

Esq. 1867. (Adelaide. 1868.) 

(29) Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales. Vol. 12, p. 225. 

(30) Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales. Vol. 14, p. 20. 

(31) Astronomische Nachrichten, Nos. 2635-2636 (Dr. Auwers). 

(32) Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. Vol. 48. 

(33) W. E. Cooke. Report on the Latitude and Longitude of the Perth Observatory. 

Western Australia. . (Official Report to the Under-Secretary. 21st September, 
1899.) 

(34) Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. Vol. 62, p. 286. 

(35) Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science. Vol. 14. Melbourne 

Meeting, 1913. Section A. P. Baracchi, Australian Longitudes. 

(36) Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science. Vol. 6. Brisbane 

Meeting, 1895. Section A. P. Baracchi — On the most Probable Value and Error 
of Austialian Longitudes, including that of the Boundary Lines of South 
Australia with Victoria and New South Wales. 

(37) Veroffentlichun dos Konigl. Preuszis-hcn Geodatischcn Institutes. Neue Folge, 

No. 15. 

(38) Astronomische Nachrichten. No. 3993-94. Albrecht. 

(39) Dr. Otto Klotz. Transpacific Longitudes b('tween Canada and Australia and Now 

Zealand executed during the years ! 903- 1 904. (Ap]jundix 3. Report of tlio 
Chief Astronomer of Canada for 1905). (Ottawa. 1907.) 

(40) Australasian Association for the Advancement of Si.ictice. Vol. 7. Sydney 

Meeting, 1898. Section A, p. 176. T. K. Furbor — The Trigonometrical Survey of 
New South Wales, with mention of Similar Surveys in other Colonies. 

(41) Commonwealth of Australia. Department of Homo Affairs. Conference of the 

Director of Commonwealth Lands and Surveys, the Surveyor-General and 
the Government Astronomer f)f New Zealand, and the Surveyors-General of 
the States of the Commonwealth of Australia. Melbourne, 20th to 25th May, 
1912. (Melbourne. 1912.) 



386 Federal Handbook. 



(4) APPENDIX B. 

SOME ASTRONOinCAL PAPERS PUBLISHED BY AUSTRALIANS. 

Notation. 
for " Astronomical Rejrister." 



Astr. Reg. 

J.R.S. N.S.W. 

M.N. R.A.S. . . 

J.B.A.A. 

Trans. R.S. S.A. 

Ap. J. 

P. & Prcs. R.S. Tas. 



for " Journal of the Royal Society of New South Wales." 

for " MontUy Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society." 

for " Journal of the British Astronomical Association." 

for " Transactions of the Royal Society of South Australia." 

for " Astrophysical Journal." 

for " Papers and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Tas- 



New South Wales. 

W. J. MacDonnell, F.R.A.S. (1871). 

Notes from the Southern Hemisphere . . Astr. Reg. . . Vol. 9, p. 145 

B.A.C. 5554: . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . Vol. 10, p. 18 

Transit of Mercury, 1878 . . . . . . „ . . . . Vol. 16, p. 207 

Notes on the Observatories in the United J.R.S. N.S.W. . . Vol. 12, p. 229 

States 

On Star-discs and the Separating Power of ,, . . . . Vol. 12, p. 241 

Telescopes 

Observations of the Transit of Mercury, M.N. R.A.S. . . Vol. 51, p. 560 

10th May, 1891 

Note on a Dark Transit of Jupiter's I Vth J.B.A.A... .. Vol. 7, p. 401 

Satellite 

The Fifth Star in the Trapezium . . . . ,. . . . . Vol. 13, p. 28 

The Recent Sun-spots (October, 1903) .. ,. .. .. Vol. 14, p. 121 

Addi'ess on retiring from the Presidentship of ,, . . . . Vol. 15, p. 80 

the N.S.W. Branch, B.A.A. 

Occultation of Saturn, 27th October, 1906 .. Vol. 17, p. 136 

On the use of Screens for the Reduction of ,. . . . . Vol. 18, p. 44 

Glare and improvement of Definition of 

Telescopes 

Jupiter's third Satellite . . . . . . -. . . . . Vol. 19, p. 356 

Comet 1908 c. .. .. .. .. V^ol. 19, p. 352 

Occultation of Venus by the Moon, 19th ,. .. .. VoL 20, p. 152 

November, 1909 

HaUey's Comet . . . . . . . . „ .. Vol. 20, p. 200 

Galileo GaUlei . . . . . . . . „ . . . . Vol. 20, pp. 258, 

485 

Marius y. Galileo .. .. .. „ .. .. Vol. 21, p. 32 

0. D. Hirst, F.R.A.S. (1876.) 

Some Notes on Jupiter during his opposition. . J.R.S. N.S.W. . . Vol. 10, p. 83 

Remarks accompanying Drawings of Mars M.N. R.A.S. . . Vol. 38, p. 58 

(1877) 

Notes on Jupiter during his opposition . . J.R.S. N.S.W. . . Vol. 12, p. 238 

Remarks on the Colours of Jupiter's Belts ,, . . . . Vol. 14, p. 77 

and some Changes observed thereon during 

the opposition of 1880 

Notes on Mr. Cobham's Paper on " Astro- J.B.A.A. . . Vol. 15, p. 104 

nomical Drawing " 

Presidential Address, N.S.W. Branch, B.A.A., J.B.A.A. . . . . Vol. 16, p. 95 

1905 

Note on a Centauri . . . . . . ,, . . . . Vol. 17, pp. 34, 35 

Some Remarks on " Wiring " Astronomical ,, . . . . Vol. 18, p. 40 

Instruments 

Measures of some Southern Double Stars . . ,, . . . . Vol. 18, p. 174 

Note on p Eridani . . . . . . ,, . . . . Vol. 19, p. 141 

Southern Double Star Measures . . . . M.N. R.A.S. . . Vol. 70, pp. 474, 

644 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 



387 



Appendix B. — Some Astronomical Papers — continued. 
New South Wales — continued. 



F. K. McDonall. (1895.) 
An Appliance for the Direct Comparison of J.B.A.A... 

Star Colours 
Note on apparent Umbral Protusion of Sun- ,, 

spots 
Note on Aleteors, 10th and 12th August, 1895 ,, 

Note on Solar Phenomenon . . . . ,, 

Meteors, 1896 . . 

Daylight Occultation of Antares, 13th Sep- ,, 

tember, 1896 
The Zodiacal Light, 1896 . . 

Peculiar Atmospheric Phenomenon . . ,, 

The Umbral Protusion of Sun-spots . . ,, 

Dr. A. M. Alegginson. (1895.) 
On a Class in Elementary Astronomy . . J.B.A.A. 

Comet, 1901. I. . . . . . . ,, . . 

Rev. Thos. Roseby, M.A., LL.D., F.R.A.S. 

Elliptical Orbit Elements of Comet 1894 6 M N. R.A.S. 

(Gale) 
Structure of the Stellar Universe ; an Address J.B.A.A. . . 
Star- Depths ; a Lecture . . 
The Mystery of a Cnicis 
Galileo Galilei 

The Jovian Occultation (13th August, 1911) 
Astronomy in Australia . . 
Comet Problems 

The Romance of Modern Astronomy 
The Nebular Origin of Comets 



On Dark IMeteors 



T. W. Graven, Junr. (1898.) 
. . J.B.A.A. . . 



F. J. 



BayUon. (1899.) 
. . J.B.A.A. 



The Zodiacal Light and Gegenschein 

A. B. Cobham. (1902.) 
Some Southern Stars possibly Variable . . J.B.A.A 

A new Feature on Jupiter 
Visibility of the Satelhtea of Saturn 
Astronomical Drawing 
Dark Transit of Titan 

W. Morton Syhes. (1905.) 
The Zodiacal Light and the Gegenschein .. J.B.A.A.., 

Dr. R. D. Givin. (1905.) 

Naked-eye Observations of Sun-spots . . J.B.A.A. . 

Jupiter . . . . . . . . ,, 

Sun-spots . . . . . . ,, 

Occultation of Saturn, 27th October, 1906, „ 

observed at Sydney 
Saturn . . . . . . . . . . ,, 

Note on one of the Perplexities which Confront ,, 

the Amateur Observer 
Comet 1908 c . . 
Occultation of Venus, as observed at Sydney, ,, 

N.S.W., 17th November, 1909 
Notes on Satum, 1909 



Vol. 5, p. 517 

Vol. 6, p. 29 

Vol. 6, p. 29 
Vol. 6, p. 390 
Vol. 6, p. 451 

495, 496 
Vol. 7, p. 15 

Vol. 7, p. 144 
Vol. 7, p. 145 
Vol. 7, p. 458 



Vol. 5, p. 405 
Vol. 11, p. 353 



(1896.) 



Vol. 56, p. 329 

Vol. 9, p. 202 
Vol. 10, p. 396 
Vol. 20, p. 34 
Vol. 20. p. 488 
Vol. 22, p. 31 
Vol. 22, p. 321 
Vol. 23, p. 31 
Vol. 23, p. 335 
Vol. 23, p. 391 



Vol. 9, pp. 56, 75 
Vol. 10, p. 260 



Vol. 12, p. 365 
Vol. 13, p. 26 
Vol. 13, p. 195 
Vol. 15, p. 102 
Vol. 18, p. 131 



Vol. 15, p. 376 



Vol. 16, pp.62, 159 
Vol. 16, p. 139 
Vol. 16, pp. 312, 

.367 
Vol. 17, p. 135 

Vol. 18, p. 175 
Vol, 19, p. 34 

Vol. 19, p. 351 
Vol. 20, p. 160 

Vol. 20, p. 153 



388 Federal Handbook. 



Appendix B. — Some Asteonomical Papers — continued. 

New South Wales — continued. 

E. W. Esdaile. (1906.) 
Occultation of Saturn, 27th October, 1906 . . J.B.A.A.. . . . Vol. 17, p. 136 

Crepescular Rays . . . . . . „ • • ■ • Vol. 21, p. 391 

K. H. Beattie, F.R.A.S. (1906.) 

Occultation of Saturn, 27th October, 1906 . . J.B.A.A. . . . . Vol. 17, p. 133 

Occultation of o Tauri (January, 190*^) . . ,, • • • • Vol. 18, p. 291 

The Mutual Occultation of Jupiter's Satellites ,. . . . . Vol. 19, p. 3-5 

Occultation of Venus by the Moon, 19th „ . . . . Vol. 20, p. 151 

November, 1909 

Daylight Occultation of t Sagittarii . . ,, . . . . Vol. 21, p. 113 

Halley's Comet . . . . . . • • „ • • . - • Vol. 21, p. 269 

Total Eclipse of the Sun, 28th April, 1911 . . ,, . . . . Vol. 21, p. 392 

The Jovian Occultation, 13th August, 1911 . . ., . . . . Vol. 22, p. 30 

The Atmosphere in Observation Work .. ,, .. .. Vol. 22, p. 33 

Saturn's Rincjs .. .. .. .. ,, ■• •• Vol. 22, p. 47 

Visibility of Mercury .. .. .. ■• •• •• Vol. 22, p. 49 

Some Measures of Southern Doubles . . ,. . . . . Vol. 22, p. 149 

Some Thoughts on Stellar Impact . . . . ,. . . - . Vol. 22, p. 378 

Lacaille 7194— A rapid Binary .. .. Vol. 23, p. 34 

The Parabolic Comets — of our System, or from ,, . . . . Vol. 23, p. 343 

Beyond ? 

T. Ranken. (1906.) 

The Structure of Comets . . . . . . J.B.A.A. . . . . Vol. 16, p. 306 

G. II. Uoskins. (1907.) 
Observations of Mars with a 12-in. Reflector J.B.A.A. . . . , Vol. 18, p. 34 

P. Chauleur. (1907.) 

Dark Transit of Titan . . . . . . J.B.A.A. . . . . Vol. 18, p. 172 

./. L. Adams. (1908.) 

Daniel's Comet 1907 <Z .. .. .. J.B.A.A... .. Vol. 18, p. 290 

II. Brown. (1909.) 

The Aurora Australis of 26tb September, 1909 J.B..A.A. . . . . Vol. 20, p. 97 

Occultation of Venus by the Moon, 19th ,, . . . . Vol. 20, p. 152 

November, 1909 

Victoria. 

W. H. Wooster. (1891.) 
All night with a Lunar Eclipse . . . . J.B.A.A. . . . . Vol. 2, p. 44 

Conjunction of Jupiter and Venus . . ,, . . . . Vol. 2, p. 281 

Rev. J. II. Tuchfield. (1892.) 
The Conjunction of Jupiter and Venus .. J.B.A.A... .. Vol. 2, p. 369 

Some Notes on Mr. G. K. Gilbert's Pamphlet — „ . . . . A'ol. 6, p. 71 

" Origin of Great Walled Plains." 

Rev. J. Allen. (1900.) 
Apparent Enlargement of Heavenly Bodies J.B.A.A. . . . . Vol. 10, p. 221 

E. F. J. Love, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.A.S. (1900.) 
Rowland's Photographs of the Normal Solar J.B.A.A... ., Vol. 10, p. 352 

Spectrum 
Series in the Nebular Spectrum and in the- M.N. R.A.S. . . Vol. 62, p. 524 

Bright line Spectrum of Nova Persei 
Temporary Stars .. .. .. Proc. Roy. Soc. Vic. Vol. 12, p. 236 

Canals of Mars ; an Address .. .. J.B.A.A. .. Vol. 14, p. 162 

Prof. R. J. A. Barnard, 3I.A. (1906.) 
Note on the Algol System . . . . Ap. J. . . . . VM. 23, p. 406 

J. Beebe. (1913.) 
Gale's Comet 1912 a .. .. J.B.A.A. . . .. Vol. 23, p. 294 



Astronomy and Geodesy. 389 

Appendix B. — Some Astronomical Papers — continued. 

South Australia. 
D. B. Adamson. (1887.) 
On Measuring the Power of Telescopic Eye- Trans. R.S. S.A. .. Vol. 11, p. 112 

pieces 
Remarks on Photographing the Solar Eclipse ,, „ . . Vol. 14, p. 61 

of 12th December, 1890 

A. W. Dohbie. (1892.) 
(Title only.) ConFtruction of the Pveflecting Trans. R.S. S.A. . . Vol. 17, p. .375 

Telescope 
The Old Observatory at Benares . . . . J.B.A.A. . . . . Vol. 13, p. 357 

Photographs of the Eclipse of the Sun, March, ,, . . . . Vol. 15, p. 339 

1905 

Capt. Lee. (1892.) 
(Title only.) Irradiation as it Affects Astro- Trans. R.S. S.A. .. Vol. 17, p. 375 

uomical Observations 
(Title only.) Planetary Motions .. .. „ „ .. Vol. 21, p. 135 

(Title only.) Is it Probable there can be a ,, ,, .. Vol. 22, p. 265 

Second Moon to the Earth ? 

C. C. Farr, D.Sc. (1893.) 
(Title only.) Ether: The Reasons for Be- Trans. R.S. S.A. .. Vol. 18, p. 263 

lieving in its Existence and its Properties 
(Title only.) The Effect of the Tides on the „ „ . . Vol. 20, p. 283 

Rotation of the Earth 
(Title only.) Hypothesis to Account for ,, „ . . Vol. 20, p. 283 

Gravitation 

W. Holder,. (1893.) 
(Title only.) The Habitability of the Planets Trans. R.S. S.A. . . Vol. 18, p. 263 

W. Eussell. (1893.) 
(Title only.) Meteors. .. .. .. Trans. R.S. S.A. .. Vol. 18, p. 263 

./. W. H. Hallett. (1895). 
(Title only.) Determination of the Orbits Trans. R.S. S.A. .. Vol. 19, p. 292 
of Comets and their Elements 

Miss A. M. M. Todd. (1895.) 
(Title only.) Computations of Time . . Trans. R.S. S.A. . . Vol. 20, p. 283 

(Title only.) The Temples of Egypt from an „ „ . . Vol. 21, p. 135 

Astronomical Point of View 

R. W. Chapman, 31. A., B.C.E., F.R.A.S. (1896.) 
(Title only.) Nebular Hypothesis and the Trans. R.S. S.A. .. Vol. 21, p. 135 
Action of the Tides 

Lady Bro>rn. (1897.) 
(Title only.) The New Astronomy . . Tran.s. R.S. S.A. . . Vol. 22, p. 265 

-S'. B. H. Manning. (1907.) 
Jupiter without hi?. Moons — Mars .. .. J.B.A.A... .. Vol. 18, p. 131 

The Cluster about Kappa CrucLs .. .. ,. .. .. Vol. 19, pp. 29,179 

Notes on Comet 1908 c .. .. .. ., .. .. Vol. 20, p. 39 

Queensland. 
J . P. Thompson. 
TheTransit of Mercury, 11th November, 1894 M.N. R.A.S. .. Vol. 55, p. 316 

— Egress 

Tasmania. 
F. Abbott, F.R.A.,S. (1861.) 
The Variability of // Argus and its Surround- M.N. R.A.S. . . Vol. 21, p. 230 

ing Nebula 

. . Vol. 24, p. 2 
.. Vol. 25, p. 192 
, „ ,, „ . . Vol. 28, p. 200 

.. Vol. 31, pp. 226, 

230. 231 

.. Vol. 32, p. 61 

P. & Prcs. R.S. Tas. 1863, June 

„ .. .. 1865, p. 21 

„ „ .. 1868, p. 14 



390 



Federal Handbook. 



Appendix B. — Some Astronomical Papers — continued. 
Tasmania — continued. 
F. Abbott, F.R.A.S. (1661.)— continued. 
The Variability of tj Aigus and its Surround- P & Pros. R.S. Tas. 
ing Nebula 



„ „ „ ,, Astr. Reg, 

Observations of Comet II.[ 1861, at'Hobart M.n'.'r.A.S. 

Town 
On the Transit of Mercury, November, 1861 ,, 

observed at Hobart Town" 
Observations of Comet II., 1862 . . . . „ 

On the Cluster Kappa Gruois (3435 H) Lao P. & Prcs. R.S. Tas. 

1110 (Neb.) 

Means which have been adopted for Ascer- ,, ,, 

taining the Velocity of Light and the Sun's 

Distance, with especial reference to the 

forthcoming Transit of Venus over the Sun's 

Disc in 1874 and 1882 
Observations of the Occultations of Jupiter and ,, ,, 

his Satellites by the Moon, 24th April, 1864 
Notes on the Aurora Australis, Sth June, 1864 
Observations of Comet I., 186.5 



Time Signals 

Notes on Atmospheric Meteors 

The Simultaneous Disappearance of Jupiter's 

Four Moons, with some Notes upon the Laws 

that Govern their Motions 
Spectrum Analysis and its Application to 

Science 
Observations on the Transit of Mercury, 

November, 1868 

The Sun and its Office in the Universe 

The Transit of Venus 

Additional Corrected Elements for the Transit 
of Venus 9th December, 1874 

A. B. Bigrjs. 

Observations of Comets Pons-Brooks and Ross 

Spectroscopic Observations of Comet Pouo,, 
January-February, 1884 

Spectroscopic Observations of the Twilight 
Glows, Februaiy-March, 1884 

Lunar Eclipse of 30th and 31st March, 1885. . 

The Occultation of Jupiter 

Is Jupiter Self-luminous ? 

The Comets of Febniary, 1880, and January, 
1887 

On the Star " Alpha Centauri " 

Observations of Comet a 1888 (Sawerthal) 
made at Launceston, Tasmania 

A new Dark-field Micrometer for Double Star 
Measurement (Diagrams) 

Observations of Comet of July and August, 
1880, taken at Launceston 

Recent Measures of " a Centauri " 

The Possibilities of the Telescope . . 

Total Eclipse of the Moon, 24th May, 1891 . . 

The Transit of Mercury, May, 1891 

Remarks on Sir Robert Ball's Paper (read at 
the Hobart Meeting of the Australasian 
Science Association) entitled " The Astro- 
nomical Explanation of a Glacial Period." 



M.N. R.A.S. 

P. & Prcs. R.S. Tas. 



M.N. R.A.S. 

P. & Prcs. R.S. Tas. 



(1884.) 

M.N. R.A.S. 

P. & Prcs. R.S. Tas. 



M.N. R.A.S. 

P. & Prcs. R.S. Tas. 



1870, p. 21 

1871, pp. 17, 6^ 

1872, p. 27 
Vol. 7, p. 14 
Vol. 11, p. 221 

Vol. 21, p. 260 

Vol. 22, p. 235 

Vol. 23, p. 31 
Vol. 23, p. 32 

1864, p. 3 
1864, p. 20 



1864, p. 53 

1864, p. 54 
Vol. 25, p. 197 

1865, p. 21 

1865, p. 109 

1866, p. 105 

1867, p. 24 

1868, p. 41 
Vol. 29, p. 195 

1869, p. 9 

1870, p. 62 
187.3, D. 11 
1874, p. 37 

Vol. 45, p. 116 
1884, p. 200 

1884, p. 202 

1885, p. 309 

1886, p. 31 

1886. p. 33 

1887, p. 38 

1887, p. 79 

Vol. 48, pp. 348, 

376 

1889, p. 98 

1889, p. 105 

1889, p. 106 
1891, p. 18 
1891, p. 44 

1891, p. 46 

1892, p. 21 



Pastobal and Agricultural Development of Australia. 



391 



THE PASTORAL AND 



CHAPTER IX. 

AGRICULTURAL 
AUSTRALIA. 



DEVELOPMENT OF 



By G. A. Sinclair, Agricultural Editor of the ''Australasian " Melbourne. 







SYNOPSIS. 




1. 


SHEEP-FARillNG. 

(a) Mebinos. 

lb) Beitish Bbebds. 






Agbicxjxttjbe — continued. 
(e) Root Ceops. 
(/) Sugab. 


2. 


Cattle. 




5. 


Viticitlttjee. 


3. 


D.UBYIKG. 




6. 


FeTTIT - GEO WIJTG. 


4. 


Agricultfee. 




7. 


Irrigation and Aetesian Watee 




(a) Gkain Ceops. 




8. 


Laboue Conditions. 




(6) Ltjceene Hay. 




9. 


AGRICtTLTURAL EDUCATION. 




(c) Tobacco. 




10. 


Land Tenuee. 




(d) Ensilage. 




11. 


FOBESTRy. 



In the above title the word pastoral naturally comes before agricultural, 
inasmuch as the first serious efiorts towards developing Australia's natural 
resources were in the direction of grazing, and, moreover, the island continent 
is world-famous for its wool, while in butter and frozen meat, important 
industries have been established and a rapidly increasing export trade has 
been built up with the older continents. 

1. Sheep=Farming. 
(a) Merinos. 

The " romance of the wool trade," as far as the establishment of the 
merino in Australia goes, has often been told, and requires little recapitulation 
here. It is curious to notice, however, that the first merinos which were 
landed in Sydney came from South Africa ; while, for some seasons past, 
buyers have come fi-om that country to Australia to purchase stock of the 
best strains, which are almost as well-known in South Africa to-day as they 
are in Australia. It was, no doubt, a fortunate circumstance that the sale of 
these sheep was coincident with the sailing of a vessel for Australia, but it 
must be remembered that for some time previous, the early settlers of New 
South Wales had had the improvement of their flocks in mind, and to the 
care and skill exercised by them and their successors, aided by excellent 
pastures, the pre-eminent position at the present time of the Australian 
merino and its wool is undoubtedly due. 

There is a great difierence between the merino of to-day and the animal 
which landed here in 1797. At Camden Park, in New South Wales, the 
descendants of the original flock have been kept pure and free from admix- 
ture, but they are in every way inferior to the best modern flocks. 

In breeding merinos up to their present state of excellence, a skill and 
science have been shown which are unrivalled in the history of stock breeding. 
The expert classer is a scientist to whom the theory of Mendel is as familiar 
as the drafting yard where his skill is displayed. To see him at work, select- 
ing the sire to build up or maintain the qualities of the flock, whether in 
constitution or in wool, is a revelation, not only in sound judgment, but 
in quick decision. To show the skill of breeders, may be instanced the 



392 Federal Handbook. 



craze of a few years back for " wrinkly " sheep, when Tasraanian flocks 
in compliance with the demand, developed the deep folds. It has been said 
that " Vermont " blood was used to secure the result, but though in a few 
isolated instances this may have occurred through " get-rich-quick " desires, 
it is certain that, in the best flocks, no such importation was used. When the 
tide set the other way, the wrinkles were ironed out as quickly as they had 
been introduced, and at the last Campbell Town Show (Tasmania) — one of 
the foremost in " merino " importance in Australia — the characteristics 
were plain body, splendidly clothed, with wool of long staple and good 
quality. 

In a season like the present (1913) it is impossible to write in any way but 
enthusiastically concerning merinos. Possibly never in the annals of the 
breed have the sheep in the various States looked better than at present, 
and the prospects for good wool prices are excellent. This is emphasised 
by the sale of two rams at prices only once before exceeded, namely, in 1883, 
when two brothers, bidding against each other without knowing it, sent 
up the price of a ram from 300 guineas to 3,150 guineas. This year two 
rams have fetched 1,700 and 1,600 guineas respectively, while prices of 
500 guineas and over are not uncommon. 

Of those who, by their forethought, energy, and perseverance, laid the 
foundations of this great industry, the list is long and honorable. Each 
State had its pioneers who in those early years braved the dangers of 
marauding natives, disease, and drought, some to win success, and to found 
those flocks the names of which are to-day household words in the sheep- 
breeding industry, others, less fortunate, to fall by the way, broken by bad 
seasons and pests. 

To show the importance of the industry built up by these men and their 
successors it is only necessary to mention that the total export of wool for 
1807 was 245 lbs., while for 1911-12 it was 1,967,818 bales ; and for 1912-13, 
1,696,146 bales. 

The wool sales, too, have undergone a considerable change of venue 
of late years. Formerly all the clips were sold in London, and the prices 
realized were quoted in detail in The Australasian, the columns of which 
were eagerly scanned each week for the results of the home and neighbouring 
consignments. To-day the buyers fi-om England, France, Germany, United 
States, and in fact all manufacturing countries, attend the sales in Sydney, 
Melboiu"ne, and Geelong, and bid against one another for the choicest clips, 
whose brands they know as well as do the station-owners. Where local 
agents act for European firms, they find it necessary to visit their principals 
every few years to keep in touch with the manufacturing changes. The 
unsatisfactory methods and the discomforts of the old London sales have 
disappeared. Now, in a well-lighted room, hundreds of buyers for firms 
of world-wide fame compete by fractional bids for the wool in thousands of 
bales, samples of which have been opened and subjected to minute inspec- 
tion previously. 

The honour of gaining top price for wool in any season is highly prized 
among breeders, and does not always fall to well-known flocks. Thus, last 
season, for Victorian-sold clips, a comparatively small farmer of the Wimmera 
country in the north-west gained the coveted position, obtaining 19:Jd. per lb. 



Pastoral and Agricultural Development op Australia. 393 

for merino fleece, a figure which will give some idea of prices realized 
at the present day. This is not peculiar to Victoria, for, in New South 
Wales, a farmer with an area of under 500 acres secured the top price of 
ITjd. per lb. 

This shows that small farmers may engage in the calling with profit ; 
and when, in course of time, the large holdings of Victoria and the Riverina 
are subdivided, the merino of high quality need not necessarily disappear, 
provided that the small breeders have procured their sheep, in the first 
instance, from the fixed strains of well-known flocks. To show how the 
larger breeders fare, it may be mentioned that out of a clip of 306 bales 
including locks, etc., 114 bales realized 16|d. per lb. or over. For super, 
lambs' wool another clip obtained 23M. per lb. Again, for his 1910 clip, 
a South Australian breeder showed the following figures : — 18,12-5 grown 
sheep cut an average of 13 lbs. 7f ozs. of wool each ; 6,701 lambs cut an 
average of 4 lbs. 3| ozs. each ; 24,826 sheep and lambs cut 781 bales of wool, 
which averaged £12 2s. 5d. per bale ; average price per lb. for all sheep and 
lambs' wool, 8|d. ; average money yield per head for grown sheep, 9s. 6d. 
gross. 

The Commonwealth Statistician shows that for the year ending 30th 
June, 1912, the percentage of wool exported from the various States 
was — New South Wales, 44-4 per cent. ; Victoria, 27-8 per cent. ; Queens- 
land, 14-3 per cent.; South Australia, 8-8 per cent.; Western Australia, 
3-8 percent.; Tasmania, 0-9 per cent. It is possible that the advance 
of agriculture and of the frozen meat trade may cause a decline in wool 
production in future ; but, on the other hand, it is more than likely that 
the centre and north of the Commonwealth will afford a haven for the large 
flocks, while the southern States will breed the pure sheep necessary to 
maintain the quality of the wool. 

(b) British Breeds. 

While merinos hold the pride of place, it must not be supposed that 
our early efforts were confined to that breed. Merinos were found to be 
unsuited to the coastal districts, and Lincolns and Leicesters were early 
introductions, to be followed later by Shropshires, Southdowns, Hampshires, 
Border Leicesters, Romney Marsh, and others. But, while merino men 
soon dropped importations of Rambouillet, Negretti, and other strains, 
finding they could breed better, the mother country has been drawn on for 
*' British " breeds until within recent years. Even now occasional importa- 
tions are made of Romney Marsh sheep, the most recently fashionable ; but, 
sooner or later, after starting with the best British blood as a foundation in 
each breed, it is found that the conditions in AustraUa are so congenial 
that further importations are unnecessary. 

Before leaving the subject of wool, it may be pointed out that the improve- 
ments in manufacturing, by which so much more use can be made of the 
coarser kinds, have given a greater impetus to crossing the merino with 
Lincoln, Leicester, and other breeds. The crossbreds, too, fit in with farming 
operations better, as they can be used with greater advantage for keeping the 
fallow clean ; and, last of all, but not least, the meat export trade has made 
the rearing of fat lambs so profitable that the high quality merino flocks 



394 Federal Handbook. 



of the Riverina and the western district of Victoria are being slowly pushed 
out north and west, until there is some reason to fear that these districts, 
probably unequalled for the quality of their wool, will be lost to the industry. 

The term crossbred is applied on the mainland at any rate to the progeny 
produced by crossing merino ewes with Lincoln rams ; and it is interesting to 
compare the prices realized for wool of this character in an ordinary year. 
These are some of the prices for the season of 1911 : — Comeback fleece, 
Green Hills, 15d. per lb. ; comeback lambs, MooUne, 15d. ; crossbred fleece, 
North Station, lUd. ; Eanonynie, 14d. ; Green Hills, 14Jd. In the previous 
season Green Hills for 340 bales comeback wool averaged nearly 13|d., 
37 bales reaching 15d. 

While considerable skill has been shown in breeding for the frozen meat 
trade, much still remains to be done, and it would no doubt benefit the 
industry if lambs were sold according to quality of carcass and not solely 
by weight. At the present time, breeding for fat lambs is not conducted 
on very definite lines. The difficulty is that the Australian cannot help 
regarding the sheep as primarily a wool producer. To him, the very raison 
d'etre of the sheep is its wool, and he thinks it advisable, in case of the lambs 
not selling as fats, to have them well-woolled as a compensation. Even 
after introducing Shropshires, breeders immediately set to work to improve 
the wool, and succeeded to a remarkable extent, but not, it is feared, without 
detriment to the frame. 

The consensus of opinion now is that for those districts where early lambs 
are most easily raised big-framed crossbred or comeback ewes should be 
used and put with rams of Shropshire, Southdown, or similar breeds. 
Opinions differ as to whether the Lincoln cross or Leicester or Border Leicester, 
or even Romney Marsh cross, is best to use. Some pin their faith to 
these breeds crossed with the merino, without using any Down sheep ; but 
for early lambs, according to the figures of several years, the crossbred-Shrop- 
shire lamb invariably tops the market. In support of this statement may be 
quoted the prices for three years of a northern district crop of lambs. 
These were lis. 9d., 12s. 3d., and 13s. 6d. per head at the nearest railway 
station, and were bought for freezing. They were not picked sheep, but 
represented the whole season's drop from a little under 1,000 ewes. 
Another breeder, in a later district, obtained 19s, per head for four months* 
old lambs. In both instances crossbred ewes were put to Shropshire rams. 
As the ewes in the first case mentioned cost very little more than the price 
realized by the lambs, it can be seen what profit there is in the industry, 
particularly when fodder crops are grown as a safeguard against dry 
autumns. The market is a good one and ever expanding. The opening of 
the North American and European ports promises a further demand for this 
product, and, by studying the quality of the meat required, there is every 
prospect of Australia capturing the bulk of the trade. 

One of the most recent moves in connexion with this industry is the estab- 
lishment of inland freezing works in the centre of that important lamb- 
raising district, the Wimmera. The object is to slaughter on the spot, thus 
reducing freight, and at the same time avoiding the wasting of flesh which 
occurs during the rail journey to the seaboard (estimated at about 5 lbs. per 
head for lambs). So far this enterprise, which is co-operative, has been very 



Pastoral axd Agricultural Development of Australia. 395 

successful ; but it remains yet to be seen whether labour troubles, which 
have wrecked several New South Wales inland works, will hamper this. A 
similar movement is on foot in the Goulburn Valley ; and, no doubt, others 
will follow if these prove successful. 

A great incentive will be given to the fat-lamb export trade by the opening 
up of additional routes to the seaboard in the eastern States. Portland, 
for instance, in south-west Victoria, when connected by rail through the 
VVimmera to New South Wales, will be the port of shipment for products 
from a vast territory. Again, the linking up, now being carried out, of 
the Riverina railways with those of the Goulburn Valley, will tap 
additional large areas. In New South Wales and Queensland, new territories 
are being brought rapidly into communication with the ports ; and the 
trade may safely be said to be as yet in its infancy. The growth of this trade 
up to the present may be learned from the following export statistics : — 
Season 1904-5, mutton, 550,112 carcasses; lamb, 702,898; season 1911-12, 
mutton, 2,076,208 carcasses; lamb, 1,477,131. This latter season was not 
marked by a particularly large exportation and was exceeded in that 
respect by the seasons for 1909-10, and 1910-11, 2,296,980 carcasses of 
mutton and 1,685,985 carcasses of lamb having been exported to various 
countries in the latter year. 

The adaptability of the crossbred to Australian conditions has led to 
the founding of strains, which may now be said to be fixed in type, and 
combine good quality fleeces with good mutton frames. Of these Australian 
breeds are the Carrsdales and Ideals, which cut a valuable fleece, and are 
admirable for procuring freezer lambs when crossed with the Down breeds. 
Of late years a New Zealand breed, the Corriedale, has gained a footing 
on the mainland, and promises to become popular. 

2. Cattle. 

The rearing of beef cattle in Australia has not kept pace with the sheep 
industry, and may be said to be now confined, on extensive lines at any rate, 
to Queensland, Central Australia, Western Australia, and the Northern Ter- 
ritory. The breeding of Shorthorns and Herefords, for which the western 
district of Victoria was once famed, has now been, to a large extent, aban- 
doned for dairying. There are, however, in the southern States a number 
of pure herds of these breeds, and of a high-class character. The bulls and 
cows imported in the early days as a nucleus, were of the best Bates and 
Booth blood obtainable ; and the sums paid for them astonished English 
breeders of the day. Thus, £2,500 was paid for Oxford Cherry Duke (32016), 
while his calves of between eight and twelve months averaged £458 17s. A 
big price paid in Australia was £1,732 10s. for Earl of Geneva, in February, 
1875, wliile in 1878 2,450 guineas was given for 24th Duke of Derrimut. 
As much as £27,000 has been paid for a lu-rd of 37 head, but the prices paid 
at the present time are nruch more modest. Thus at the last Sydney Royal 
Show sale the highest figures obtained were under 300 guineas. 

At the same time a considerable trade is spi'ingiiig up in frozen beef, 

which, in consideration of the fact that the world's consumption has increased 

in far greater measure than the supply, will probably become greater, and lead 

to better utilization of the Northern Territory lands. In the season 1904-5, 

C. 12154. 2c 



396 Federal Handbook. 



101,662 quarters of beef left Australia for other lands, principally for South 
Africa, while in 1911-12, the quantity exported was 648,313 quarters. Compar- 
ing it with that obtained by other exporting countries, the price realized is 
usually a little below that of New Zealand beef, which is fattened on artificial 
grasses and has but a short way to travel to the port, and a little above that 
of Argentine beef. Queensland provides the greater part of this trade. 
The southern States will probably, in the future, raise pure stock to keep up 
the character of the northern herds. 

3. Dairying. 

Mention has been made of the detrimental influence dairying has had on 
the raising of fat cattle in the southern States ; but nevertheless the industry 
has brought great wealth and prosperity to the Commonwealth. In 1911, the 
total production of butter in the Commonwealth was 211,577,745 lbs. ; of 
cheese, 15,886,712 lbs. ; of milk, 5,947,269,640 lbs. ; of condensed milk, 
22,983,707 lbs. ; and of bacon and ham 53,264,652 lbs. The value of 
exported butter alone was £4,637,-362. As an idea of the relative values 
of the exported products it is interesting to note that, in the same yeai, 
wool totalled £26,071,193 ; frozen mutton and lamb, £1,633,622 ; frozen 
beef, £1,102,132. 

Victoria led the way in developing the dairying industry ; and of the early 
buttermakers and teachers, the name of David Wilson stands pre-eminent. 
In the eighties and early nineties, the separator was winning its way into 
prominence, co-operative butter factories were springing up all over the land, 
and the quality of the product was improving in a wonderful degree. When 
the financial depression occurred after the collapse of the land-boom, butter- 
making was on a firm foundation and the quick recovery from that de- 
pression was, in a great measure, due to this industry. 

When it was seen what great profit there was in dairying, the large land- 
owners in the western district of Victoria cut up their properties into small 
holdings, and let these to small farmers for dairying on shares. The main 
features of this system are that the landlord provides land, buildings, 
stock, machinery, etc. ; the tenant furnishes labour, and the landlord takes 
two-thirds of the butter-fat returns, the receipts from pigs being equally 
divided between the parties. So successful were most of these small farmers 
that they now own their own farms, having paid from £40 to £80 or even 
£100 per acre. The soil is wonderfully rich, and the climate suitable, rye 
grass and clover growing luxuriantly, while lucerne and maize provide ample 
fodder for the autumn and winter without any irrigation. Good roads, too, 
are easily made and kept up. 

Gippsland is another dairying province with all the favorable natural 
conditions, but bad roads greatly hamper her progress. Steps are however 
now being taken to improve them. 

For a time the dairying industry made great headway in the northern 
districts where land was cheaper, and means of communication good ; but, 
after the great drought of 1902, and with the improved prices for grain, 
wool, and sheep, many reverted to the old farming methods. At the 
present time, dairying is flourishing in Northern Victoria only on irrigated 
lands, or where the rainfall is ample, as in the King River Valley. 



Pastoral and Aoricultural Development op Australia. 397 

In New South Wales the dairying districts are the South Coast and the 
northern rivers ; and great progress has been made, the output of that 
State being at present not far behind that of Victoria. 

In Queensland the industry is increasing rapidly, the rich Darling Downs 
being now a huge dairying province. Queensland's output is about one- 
third that of Victoria. One cannot fail to realize how much the rural pro- 
ducer owes to scientists whose researches in refrigeration have enabled perish- 
able products to be manufactured in hot climates and conveyed on long 
voyages to the marts of the world. 

At the present time the export trade in butter is at a critical stage. The 
cheapness and excellence of home separators, and the saving of haulage by 
their use, led to their almost universal adoption about ten years ago. A 
number of factories stood out against their use, recognising the effect which 
the irregular ripening of the cream would have on the quality of the butter, 
but, one by one, they were forced to fall in line. The consequence has been 
the disappearance of most of that superfine article for which the best 
factories were famous. There is no doubt about the deterioration. It is 
proved by comparing the prices at present obtained for Australian butter 
and that of our two great competitors, Denmark and New Zealand, with the 
prices realized a few years ago. 

There is no need for this deterioration. The only things necessary are 
cleanly conditions and the delivery of cream to the factory at frequent 
intervals. The high prices received in Europe, in the season 1911-12, for 
butter of any kind, did immense harm to the industry in Australia, as it 
engendered a carelessness, which the sharp lesson of falling prices is now 
correcting. The authorities in the various States are now endeavouring to 
improve the quality of the output by legislation, the direction taken being 
that of compulsory grading of cream, with the licensing of factory managers. 
This, it is believed, will prevent cream rejected at one factory being 
accepted at another. 

The Commonwealth had previously endeavoured to control the industry 
by compulsory grading of butter at the ports ; but, through a flaw in the 
Act, this supervision was summarily stopped by action at law, though quite 
80 per cent, of the butter sent away from Victoria is still voluntarily graded. 
The competition of margarine is shutting second-class butter out of the Eng- 
lish market, and strenuous efforts are now necessary to prevent any but 
first-class butter leaving our shores. 

In another direction, too, there is great room for improvement, and that 
is in the return per cow per annum. Taking Victoria as the leading dairying 
State, the average annual return per cow is under £7 ; while, if labour, rental, 
value of land, etc., be taken into consideration, the cost of keeping a cow 
amounts to £6 10s. per annum. As many herds are returning £14, £15, and 
even £20 and upwards per cow per annum, there is evidently great room for 
improvement in the average herd. Efforts are being made to improve matters 
in New South "Wales by the encouragement of milk-testing and weighing 
societies, and in Victoria by the issue of certificates to cows giving standard 
returns in pure herds, which have submitted to official tests. Indifferent 
milkers will thus be culled out, and only milking strains on both sides used 
for breeding. 

2c2 



398 ■ Federal Handbook. 



As to the cattle employed in dairying, all the recognised breeds are well 
represented in Australia. The Jersey may be said to be the favorite 
with butter makers at preseiit, though the old-time Ayrshire, bred from the 
best strains imported years ago, is slowly working its way back to favour, 
as it is found that by culling judiciously, not only quantity but a high butter- 
fat test is obtained. Importations of high-priced Jerseys of milking strains 
are still constantly made. Guernseys, too, have admirers, while a number 
of the Shorthorn breeders have developed milking strains in their herds, 
which compare favorably with any other breeds. In New South Wales 
is a breed — the Illawarra — which is the favorite in some wide districts, and 
is practically a milking type in which Shorthorn predominates. In Tasmania 
some years ago the Alderney was well represented. Throughout the Common- 
wealth the present tendency is, whatever breed is used, to look for milking 
strains on both sides ; and the increase of butter-fat per head, combined with 
care in manufacture, will put the Australian dairyman in the position to sell 
a better product more cheaply, and, aided by good pastures and fine 
climate, to still make a handsome profit. 

The best dairymen make ample provision for feeding their cows during 
autumn and winter, either with green fodder crops, hay, or ensilage, or with 
all three ; oats, wheat, or lucerne is used for the hay, and maize or mixed 
crops for ensilage. The use of the silo is spreading slowly all through the 
country. Not only does the progressive dairyman now regard it as a 
necessary equipment, but even sheep breeders are storing away surplus feed 
for future needs. 

A great feature in connexion with dairying is the development it has 
caused of co-operative principles amongst farmers generally. Starting with 
co-operative butter factories, the movement has spread to the handling of 
farm products of all kinds, and the purchase of machinery, bags, seed, etc. 
The latest phase in this development is the establishment of bacon-curing 
factories in New South Wales and Victoria. Pig breeding has always been 
considered a necessary and usually a profitable adjunct to dairying ; but 
a couple of seasons ago pigs were unsaleable. To remedy this, co-operative 
works were started for the curing and exportation of surplus pork, so that 
no trouble may be anticipated in the future. 

It should be noticed that, besides butter, cheese and condensed milk 
are manufactured in considerable quantities in the Commonwealth, while 
powdered milk is also on the market. 

The one great drawback to the dairying industry is the difficulty in 
procuring labour. This has led to the employment of milking machines, 
which, where reasonable care and cleanliness are employed, are proving 
entirely satisfactory. Many of those in use are of Australian manufacture. 

Dairying on shares seems one of the most satisfactory methods of 
profitably employing suitable laud, especially to families with small capital 
arriving from overseas. In one instance, two young Englishmen (Londoners) 
have each been making £180 a year with a Gippsland dairv-farmer. In 
another case, a Scotch farmer and his family have a steady income of £400 
per annum. Their small capital remains untouched and is added to from 



Pastoral and Agricultural Development of Australia. 399 

year to year, while in the meantime they are gaining experience of Australian 
conditions. It has been stated that one large landowner in a very fertile 
district guarantees a man and family £500 per annum. 

4. Agriculture. 
(a) Grain Crops. 

Possibly to the outside superficial observer Australia appears a land of 
sheep stations alternating with wheat-fields. It will be found, however, on 
closer observation, that where cUmatic conditions permit it, mixed farming 
on lines closely approximating those found profitable in the older countries, 
has been carried on for many years. The districts where this form of agri- 
culture is so successful were settled by the yeomen from Great Britain, 
thoroughly trained farmers, whose descendants to-day are among the most 
skilful tillers of the soil. 

In common with other lands, Australia has made great strides in agri- 
culture, particularly in the wheat-growing areas, during the last decade, 
owing to the better methods of cultivation employed and to the increased use 
of artificial manures. The present methods of cultivation, the chief feature 
of which is the almost universal bare fallow before a crop, are the result of 
experience ; but for their knowledge of the value of manures, farmers are 
indebted to the instruction given and experiments carried out by officers in 
the Agricultural Departments of the various States. The early wheat 
farmers, most of whom were old-time gold diggers who selected land when the 
alluvial fields became worked out, had a hard fight before their success was 
assured. 

Land could be selected for £1 per acre, the payments being spread over 
long terms of years ; but the cost of clearing, fencing, buildings, and 
implements soon exhausted the selectors' capital and earnings, and advances 
could not be secured until a Crown lease was issued, which was not done for 
several years after selection. Their wheat had to be carted long distances — ■ 
often 50 miles or more — to the nearest railway station, and labour of any 
kind was dear. It is not to be wondered at then, that, as a rule, they were 
content to crop the same piece of ground for several years and only turn their 
attention to another block when the first showed signs of exhaustion. With 
better facilities for marketing produce, and with more money for purchasing 
implements, improved methods have been followed, and to-day the wheat- 
growing areas promise to retain their fertility for many years to come. 

The general cropping practice is as follows : in the springtime — July and 
August — -the land for the next year's crop is ploughed to a depth which de- 
pends on the character of the soil, about 7 inches being the rule in the Riverina, 
the Goulburn Valley, and South Australia, and from 3 to 4 inches in the Wim- 
mera and other heavy clay loams. It is then harrowed and worked down 
fine with a cultivator or scarifier, and after every shower the harrows are put 
over the fallow to form a mulch, and arrest loss of moisture through 
evaporation. This, briefly, is the Australian " dry farming " system, evolved 
by her practical farmers. Sheep also are used to keep the fallow clean, 
their droppings helping to supply organic matter, and since the rise of the 
frozen meat trade, cropping and sheep-raising go hand-in-hand. On some 



400 Federal Handbook. 



light soils, whicli, if worked fine, set like cement with, heavy rain, the land 
is left in the rough after ploughing, and only sheep are used to keep it 
clean. After the first autumn rains, which are anxiously looked for by the 
beginning of April, the weeds which have sprung up are turned under, 
the land is harrowed and the seed is sown with a drill, from 50 to 60 lbs. 
of seed and 50 to 80 lbs. of superphosphates being used per acre. After 
drilling, the seed is covered by harrowing, and occasionally the land is rolled 
to consolidate the soil. Many farmers make a practice of feeding down their 
crops to make the plants stool out better, while at the same time 
providing feed for the ewes and lambs. Rains may usually be expected 
in June, July, and August, but the critical period for the crops is in October 
and early November. Rain falling or withheld about that time makes or 
mars the yield. Hay cutting, which means cutting wheat or oats with reaper 
and binder, takes place in November, and the earliest varieties of wheat are 
ready for harvesting in December. 

Not many grain crops are cut and threshed ; but it is sound far min g 
to use this method with oats, as less grain is lost and the straw is invaluable 
on the farm. In harvesting her grain, Australia has her own peculiar machine 
to use — the stripper-^ which, with its improvement the harvester — has 
enabled her growers to contend with scarcity of labour and comparatively low 
yields. It is common knowledge that the Australian stripper origi- 
nated in South Australia in 1845, the invention of J. Ridley, but it is 
not so well known what struggles and difficulties the early mechamcs had 
before they brought the harvester to its present state of perfection. In 1879 
the South Australian G-overnment gave a great incentive to inventors by 
offering a prize of £4,000 for a satisfactory machine. This attracted, besides 
local men, competitors from Victoria, and even from far CaUfornia. No 
machine was awarded the first prize, but £250 was divided among four 
of the competitors as an encouragement. Then, for some years, interest 
in this subject languished, and public encouragement ceased. In 1883, 
however, a description appeared in The Australasian of a machine that 
was working in California. Both State and public interest were again 
aroused, prizes were offered to successful inventors by the Victorian 
Government, and fi-om that time improvements have gradually been made 
in the construction and efficiency of the macliines. 

The difference between Australian methods and those of other lands may be 
briefly set out. The reaper and binder cuts and binds the crop into sheaves, 
to be threshed later by a thresliing machine ; the stripper gathers the stalks 
into a comb, the heads are stripped off by beaters, and the grain threshed 
from the heads by winnowers at some later date ; the harvester strips off 
the heads, as with the stripper, but does the threshing at the same time, 
and delivers the cleaned grain into a hopper or into bags ; and the header 
of California cuts, threshes, and cleans the crop at one operation, but to win 
the short-strawed grain, takes in a lot of lengthy straw, as it cuts everything 
above the level of the knife, Uke a reaper and binder. This machine takes 
from 24 to 30 mule? to draw it, and is cumbersome. While the Common- 
wealth possesses a variety of good strippers and harvesters, it is an axiom 
of implement manufacturers never to rest content with the present machine, 
but ever to aim at improvement. The aims which machinery firms 



Pastoral and Agricultural Development of Australia. 401 



have had before them are : — Cutting a larger area in a given time ; the lessen- 
ing of the draught ; prevention of grain shelling ; harvesting " lodged " 
and dirty crops ; an early, late, and damp weather worker, which will 
not drag out the plants by the roots ; at the same time a machine which will 
turn out as good a sample of grain as the best of the present harvesters. 
The reaper-thresher, the latest improvement, saems to have gone a long way 
towards reaching this goal. 

A large amount of work has been done in breeding wheats which are 
resistant of diseases ; strong in the straw and hard, to stand up against the 
hot winds which break down or thresh out weaker varieties ; prolific and 
yielding grain of high quality. The first systematic movement towards 
improvement of wheats was made by Victoria, where, in 1890, a conference 
of experts from various States was held to devise means for fighting " rust " 
in wheat, which had caused serious losses in all the States during preceding 
years. Other conferences followed, until eventually it was recognised that 
this was only one of many problems confronting the wheat-grower. It was 
through these conferences that other States learned of the research work which 
William Farrer had been carrying on since 1882 in New South Wales, and his 
example stimulated others to carry on cross-breeding and selection on parallel 
lines. In " Federation " he produced a wheat which is familiar to 
every farmer in Australia, and which has increased the yields of the mainland 
States by many thousands of bushels. " Federation " possesses in a strong 
degree the qualities of prolificacy, shortness and strength of straw, and power 
of holding its grain. The trend of experiments now is to produce wheat of 
high milling qualities, which will raise the value of Australian flour in the 
home market, though at the present time our wheats from their whiteness are 
used chiefly to blend with the yellower wheats of other lands. 

For many years now, there have been scattered through the States a 
number of men who have devoted their lives to the breeding of wheat and 
to the study of plant disease. Their labours, undertaken from a love of 
science and with no hope of monetary gain, should still further assure the 
success of this industry, and eventually bring Australia to the front rank 
as a wheat producing country. 

Farmers show a commendable care in the seed which they sow, generally 
using cleaned and graded grain, while they watch carefully the work of tJie 
different experiment stations, and eagerly buy any new varieties of promise. 

In the three eastern wheat-growing States of the mainland, well-equipped 
experiment stations are carrying on fine work, as axe also a number of private 
investigators. 

To return to cropping methods, farmers are working steadily towards a 
rotation of crops which will maintain the land in good heart. It is recog- 
nised that the system of bare fallowing must eventually exhaust the soil. 
The old rotation has been bare fallow, wheat, bare fallow ; or bare fallow, 
wheat, oats ; or bare fallow, wheat, oats, pasture — the long stubble left by the 
stripper being burnt off when one crop follows another ; or if, after wheat, 
the land is left in pasture, the straw is worked back into the ground by the 
stock. While burning off the stubble is wasteful of humus, it serves to clean 
the ground of insect pests and weeds. Oats should follow wheat as often as 
possible to prevent the attacks of the disease " take-all," even when a fallow 



402 Federal Handbook. 



intervenes. But oats are not as widely grown as wheat, because the local 
market is soon supplied, and the export trade is not large. The necessity 
for providing a fodder crop for sheep has led to rape being sown in the autumn 
on the stubble, the sheep droppings, roots, and stalks, when turned under, 
helping to replenish the soil. Far-seeing farmers have recognised that a 
leguminous crop is necessary, and peas are now sown, being generally used 
as a fodder crop, and the residue being turned under for green manure. 

The rotation most likely to be adopted in the near future, at any rate 
wherever a 15-in. rainfall can be depended upon, is bare fallow, wheat, oats, 
rape ; or bare fallow, wheat, oats, peas. The difficulty in adopting a 
regular rotation is that oats and fodder crops cannot be grown as profitably 
as wheat. 

One of the most striking features about wheat-growing of late years is the 
extension of the safe areas westward in New South Wales, by the adoption 
of fallowing, systematic working of paddocks to check weed growth, and the 
use of artificial manures. 

It is difficult to state the average yields of cereals to convey definite 
information, because they differ so much with locality and with seasons. 
In Tasmania, .50 or 60 bushels to the acre are not uncommon ; while on the 
mainland, anything over 30 bushels is a good return. 

In the Mallee districts of Victoria and South Australia, with a limited 
rainfall, lighter yields are usually experienced ; but the cheapness of the 
land, which is easily cleared for the plough by rolling down and burning 
off the scrub and then ploughing with stump-jump ploughs, enables wheat- 
growing to be profitably carried on. These lands and the subdivided sheep 
country of New South Wales ofi^er perhaps the best prospects for mixed farm- 
ing in the eastern States. The best Mallee land is obtainable at £1 per acre on 
extended terms, which in South Australia are extremely liberal, as for four 
years no instalments are payable, and for the next two years the interest due 
is at a very low rate. Contrast this with the price of mixed-farming land in 
the older districts, where from £6 to £8 per acre is common, while in picked 
districts £12 to £15 per acre was realized a couple of years ago, though those 
prices have since declined. In all the States, land selection can be made on 
reasonable terms ; and in Queensland and Western Australia, fi'ee grants are 
made to overseas sett'ers. 

Some idea of the importance of wheat-growing to the Commonwealth 
may be grasped by noticing that for the 1911-12 season, nearly 72 mil ion 
bushels of wheat were produced, the returns for 1910-11 being over 95 
million bushels, and for 1909-10 nearly 90i million bushels. The average 
yields for those seasons in the same order were 9-6, 12 -9, and 13-7 bushels ; 
and for 10 years, which include the great drought of 1902-3, the average 
is 10-48 bushels per acre. 

A burning question with wheat-growers at the present day is the handling 
of the harvest from fields to sea-board. A few years ago legislation com- 
pelled the use of three-bushel bags instead of four-bushel. These bags, are 
carted to the station as soon as harvest is over, the results being that the 
goods platforms are loaded in a few weeks to their full carrying capacity, 
the overflow being stacked in the station yard, there to remain, possibly for 
months, before the railways can deal with them. This means considerable 



Pastoral and Agricultural Development of Australia. 403- 

loss from mice, and, in some years, from rain as platforms and yards are 
quite unprotected from the weather. The fact that new bags must 
be purchased every year, is also a considerable tax on the producer. 
For these reasons handling in bulk has the strong support of all country 
people, and a definite movement in this direction seems about to be made. 
A Royal Commission in Victoria has just reported in favour of bulk-handling, 
and New South Wales has brought an engineer from the United States to 
devise a workable scheme for that State, and other States are also studying 
the best means for dealing with the situation. 

The output of oats depends to a considerable extent on the prices ruling 
for the previous season. Oats were very cheap for years, and many ceased 
to gi'ow them. The production has varied during the last eight years from 
9 million bushels to 16 million bushels, and the average over the whole- 
period is 20J bushels per acre. The Algerian oat is the principal variety 
grown. Oats are grown largely for hay ; and in some districts wheat and 
oats mixed are sown for this purpose. Victoria produces nearly three times 
the quantity of oats grown by any other State, Tasmania coming second, 
with New South Wales and South Australia about equal. Tasmania 
has the highest average— 30 bushels per acre. 

With barley, the difference in price between a bright sample and a dis- 
coloured one is so great that the crop is not grown to any very large extent,, 
the highest production during ten years having been 2| million bushels in 
1908-9, and the average for ten years, 18-83 bushels per acre. Victoria, 
and South Australia are the largest producers, though Tasmania has again 
the highest average — 24 bushels per acre. 

Maize-growing for grain is very successfully carried on in the northern 
rivers district of New South Wales, in Gippsland (Victoria) and in Queensland. 
Victoria can claim some of the highest yields in the world, returns of over 
100 bushels per acre being by no means uncommon. A great drawback 
to the industry is the want of communication. The rivers are usually 
un-navigable on account of sand bars at their mouths, and in many cases- 
the maize is marketed " on the hoof " by using it as pig feed. As a fodder 
crop, maize is one of the most common, yielding a great bulk of material in 
the coastal districts, under the natural rainfall, and inland, under irrigation. 
Not much attention has been given by the Agricultural Departments of the 
States to the selection of maize seed, or the breeding of varieties to suit 
varying local conditions. Most of the leading American varieties are grown, 
and considerable enterprise has been shown by private individuals in raising 
pure seed. 

Both in point of acreage under crop and total production, New South 
Wales usually holds pride of place, though Queensland is very nearly equal, 
while Victoria comes a long way behind. In yield per acre, on the other 
hand, Victoria is a long way ahead, having, for ten years, produced an average 
of 55 bushels per acre, the highest during that period being in 1903-4, when 
76| bushels per acre was the amount recorded. The average for the whole 
Commonwealth for the ten years from 1902 to 1912 is 26 "84 bushels per acre. 

The production of hay in the Commonwealth is intimately associated with 
the cultivation of cereals, as the great bulk of this fodder is composed of wheat 
or oats. Formerly, Victoria exported a large quantity to New South Wales 



404 Federal Handbook. 



and Queensland, but, the former State now grows sufficient for its own 
requirements, except in times of drought. As a rule, the farmer cuts his 
crop for hay or keeps it for grain, whichever promises to bring in the larger 
gain ; but, in the cooler districts, cereals are often sown for hay alone, and 
a mixture of wheat and oats often being used for the purpose. In these dis- 
tricts special hay wheats are sown, but Algerian oats are employed every- 
where. The colour, smell, and amount of grain in the head are factors in 
determining the value of hay, the yields of which in the hay districts are 
from 2 to 3 tons per acre in good years. In the wheat districts, 2 tons per 
acre is a good hay crop, and the average for the Commonwealth for ten years 
is only 1^ tons per acre. Victoria has a production of a little over one million 
tons to her credit for 1911-12. In the early days, hay was made from the 
natural pasture grasses, but these are now seldom used for this purpose. 

(b; Lucerne Hay. 

With the expansion of dairying, and, especially since the irrigation settle- 
ments in the various States have been founded, lucerne is largely used for 
maldng into hay. The usual and most sound practice is to grow enough 
of this fodder to supply the needs of the farm ; but, during a dry 
period in the autumn of 1912, a demand sprang up for this article, 
and many sold off their stock in order to grow hay. The next 
season being a good one, lucerne hay was practically unsaleable. A 
number of sheep-owners in the Eiverina, taught by the experience of past 
dry years, make immense stacks of lucerne hay from irrigated paddocks, 
which are kept in reserve for periods of scarcity. From four to six cuttings 
of lucerne per season can be counted on from irrigated land, and in districts 
where a good rainfall is assured, the yield at each cutting varies from 1 to 
2 tons per acre. The best seed is grown in the Commonwealth and comes 
from the Hunter River district, in New South Wales, but a fair quantity is 
imported. Sowing is done in either spring or autumn, but the former is 
considered a better time, since a clean seed-bed can then be more certainly 
assured. 

(c) Tobacco. 

Of the States New South Wales now grows the greatest amount of tobacco, 
the industry in Victoria being confined mainly to Chinese, many of whom are 
working on shares with white land-owners. The rich alluvial flats are found 
very suitable for producing the finest leaf. About 1 ,500 acres are under culti- 
vation in New South Wales, about half this amount in Queensland, and one- 
third in Victoria. The average yield for the Commonwealth is about 7f 
cwt. per acre. Though a payable enough crop, the incessant labour requu-ed 
in a land where labour is dear and scarce, has led to many abandoning it. 

(d) Ensilage. 

One cannot leave the subject of cropping without further reference to ensi- 
lage, a fodder which should especially appeal to Australian farmers, since the 
conditions lend themselves so readily to the preservation of fodder in this 
form, and at the same time deinand conservation of supplies for the safety 
of the stock. It is essentially a land of bounteous seasons and of dry ones. 
In the good years thousands of tons of fodder go to waste. In the dry seasons. 



Pastoral and Agricultural Development of Australia. 405 

thousands of cattle and sheep die, not so much from want of fodder, for often 
dry feed is available, but through impaction, which a succulent fodder hke 
ensilage would prevent. 

Unfortunately, statistics show that the quantity of ensilage made each 
year is not increasing, thus proving that the farming community still fail 
as a class to appreciate the true value of this form of stock food. 

Provident farmers adopt the practice of sowing in the early autumn 
a mixed fodder crop of rye, peas, vetches, and barley. This is cut in the 
spring, which prevents the weeds going to seed. The silos are constructed 
above ground and the material is first chaffed, and then elevated or forced 
up into the silo by means of a blower. To consolidate the green fodder, it 
is trodden down during the filling process, particularly round the edges ; and, 
as a rule, unless it is to be used at once, is covered with straw-chafi or bags 
and weighted. Where a surplus amount of spring grass is available, it is 
occasionally converted into ensilage, being put straight into the silo, without 
chaffing. Later in the year, about October, summer fodder crops are 
sown — maize, sorghum, millet, etc., and these are converted into ensilage in 
the autumn. 

(e) Root Crops. 

The two main root crops are potatoes and onions, though turnips, 
mangolds, etc., are grown in the cool districts. Victoria is the largest pro- 
ducer of potatoes, heading the list both in area under crop and in output. 
New South Wales comes next in point of area, but is closely pushed by Tas- 
mania in output with half the area under crop. For many years, Tasmania 
supplied all the States except Victoria with most of their tubers ; but the 
ravages of potato-blight reduced the output, and induced farmers to under- 
take a systematic rotation instead of exhausting their land with the one crop. 
Victorian crops also suffered severely from this disease, but, by spraying and 
resting the ground, this trouble has been overcome. When the blight was 
rampant, a number of growers dropped out, and, in consequence, in 1912, 
potatoes were at famine prices. Those who had continued growing them, 
having clean, good crops, the result of assiduous work, received handsome 
rewards. Rich potato land sells at £100 or more per acre, and the rental often 
reaches from £4 to £6 per acre. When prices have exceeded £10 per ton, cases 
have been reported where the purchase money has been recouped in one season. 
After a scarcity, every farmer with a good piece of land in a suitable locality 
puts in potatoes, with the consequence that, in the following season, prices 
are hardly payable. As an instance, the price last year, was for months 
not lower than £12 per ton, reaching much higher for a short time, whereas 
this year, the choicest varieties can be purchased for £4. A definite rotation, 
in these districts, will not only correct this great irregularity of prices, but 
also eradicate diseases and maintain the fertility of the soil. 

The production for the Commonwealth for 1911-12 was 391,489 tons, a 
considerable decrease from the yield of 1906-7, when it was 507,153 tons. 
Tasmania was responsible for a deficit of no less than 120,000 tons. The total 
yields in 1911-12 were— Victoria, 119,092 tons ; New South Wales, 75,040 
tons ; Tasmania, 62,164 tons. The averages for the principal States for ten 
seasons are — Tasmania, 3 '94 tons per acre; Victoria, 2 '8 tons; South 



406 Federal Handbook. 



Australia, 2-7 tons; New South Wales, 2-35 tons; Western Australia has 
an average of 3 tons per acre, but her highest annual production is only 
a little over 9,000 tons. 

In onions, the production of Victoria only is worth mentioning. Her 
largest output was in 1910-11, when 37,484 tons were grown, with an average 
of a little over 6 tons per acre. Like potatoes, onions fluctuate very much in 
price ; and while, in some years, the cost price of the land can be earned in 
one season, in others they have been a drug in the market. Last year prices 
were £17 and over per ton, whereas this year £6 is a usual figure. As the 
average yield for ten years is over 5 tons per acre, some idea may be gathered 
of the returns ; but it must be remembered that the work of preparing the 
ground and keeping the crop clean is very expensive, while the crop is a 
delicate one to handle. 

(f) Sugar. 

Queensland and New South Wales are the only States which grow sugar- 
cane, the former producing about 90 per cent, of the total. For 1911-12 
the output for Queensland was 1,. 534,4.51 tons of cane, with an average of 
16 tons per acre, wluch is very nearly the average for the last ten years. 
New South Wales has an average of 22 • 64 tons per acre for the same 
period. 

It is difficult for any one not a resident of sugar-cane districts to under- 
stand the situation of the industry. Formerly, the work was carried on 
by black labour recruited from the islands under strict Government super- 
vision. The " White Australia " policy disposed of this system, and as a 
consequence, the proportion of sugar produced by coloured labour declined 
from 68 per cent, of the total for 1902-3 to 6 per cent, in 1911-12. As a 
recompense to the growers, the Commonwealth Grovernment passed a Sugar 
Bounty Act, giving a bounty on all cane of a certain quality produced by 
wliite labour. In 1912, however, two Acts were passed, one abolishing the 
bounty and the other repealing the Sugar Excise Act, under which an excise 
duty of £4 per ton on manufactured sugar had been collected. These Acts 
did not, however, come into force till the following year (1913). It was 
stated at the time that the Queensland G-overnment intended to take over 
the matter, and to deal with the question of wages and conditions of 
labour. 

In Victoria, the manufacture of beet sugar is carried on ; but the industry 
is in anything but a flourishing condition, owing to the difficulty in getting 
a sufficient quantity of land under this crop to justify the working of the 
machinery. In 1911-12, there were in Victoria 752 acres sown with sugar-beet, 
which yielded 3,974 tons, or a little over 5 tons per acre. Some years ago, 
the Government of the day built a sugar-beet factory at Maffra, in Gippsland, 
equipped it with most expensive machinery, and obtained experts from 
Germany to superintend the manufacture. Owing to the lack of support 
on the part of growers, it was closed down for years, and re-opened again 
in 1910. At this time, land which had been resumed by the State for closer 
settlement purposes was disposed of with a proviso that a certain number of 
acres should be devoted to the growth of sugar beets. The constant labour 
required to keep the crops clean has rendered this branch of farming, to 
put it mildly, less remunerative than many others ; and growers are 



Pastoral and Agricultural Development of Australia. 407 



endeavouring to have the compulsory area reduced. There is also a bounty on 
beet sugar, the amount being 6s. per ton on beet giving 10 per cent of 
sugar. During 1911-12, bounty was paid on 7,481 tons. 

5. Viticulture. 

The cultivation of the vine was commenced at an early date of Common- 
wealth history by foreigners who had emigrated from the wine-making 
countries of Europe. They found the climate even more suitable than their 
own for certain classes of wine, and the soil as fertile. From these men, 
others procured cuttings or rooted vines and embarked in the industry, wine 
making being carried on principally. With rude appliances and without 
anv of the necessary scientific knowledge, they produced a lot of rough, coarse 
wine, so that " Australian wine " was a by-word in the Colonies. 

A few vignerons in Victoria and South Australia, however, having more 
capital and experience, succeeded in making wine of fair quality. This 
gradually improved, and a great impetus was given to the industry in Vic- 
toria in the nineties by the voting of a bonus, in instalments, for every acre 
planted. This induced a number of farmers and novices who were not at 
all suited for it to undertake the work. As a consequence, a great quantity 
of inferior and almost unmarketable wine was produced, so that when the 
bonuses ceased, the greater number of these inexperienced growers retired, 
the remainder struggling on, until, a few years later, the appearance of 
phylloxera compelled them also to abandon the industry. 

During this time those with large capital sunk in the trade and making 
good wine, were pushing their way into the English market, aiming ever at 
making a wine for export and not for home consmnption. Aided by the 
disappearance of the bulk of coarse, inferior wines, an export trade of con- 
siderable dimensions has eventually sprung up, mainly in full-bodied, dry 
red wines, which are used for blending. It is contended that these err on the 
side of strength, and lack the velvety smoothness which should characterize 
a first-quality product. However that may be, young wine can now be 
sold at a higher price than could the matured article a few years ago. A 
promising wine, at twelve months, will bring 2s. per gallon, and small growers 
are making a good profit at this price, as yields of from 300 to 500 
gallons per acre can be secured. This, briefly, has been the experience in 
Victoria. 

In South Australia, the market has been steadier, and the quality more 
uniformly good, because there has not been, at any time, a great rush into 
the industry by men unfitted for the work. In New South Wales, the 
experience has been somewhat similar to that of Victoria, on a smaller scale. 

The output of wine for the Commonwealth is about 5 million gallons, 
of which South Australia supplies about 3 million, Victoria, 1 million, New 
South Wales, 800,000, and Western Australia, 150,000 gallons. 

The spread of phylloxera in Victoria and New South Wales, while it 
accelerated the retirement of incompetent growers, has nevertheless inflicted 
serious damage on the industry, and vigorous efforts are being made to 
combat it. A number of stations for growing resistant vines have been 
established by the State Governments, and cuttings or grafted lootlings 
are distributed to gi-owers at merely the cost of production. 



408 Federal Handbook. 



The raisin and currant industry may be said to have started with the 
establishment of the irrigation settlements at Mildura (Victoria) and Een- 
mark (South Australia), on the Murray Eiver. In the early nineties, the 
product began to make itself felt on the market, which, from its superiority 
over the imported article in cleanliness and flavour, it soon captured. There 
was a danger then that prices would fall below a profitable margin ; but 
co-operation of the growers prevented this by determining to export the 
surplus after the home market had been supplied. This has been done for 
some years now, and comfortable incomes are realized from small blocks 
planted with vines. 

The total production of the Commonwealth in raisins and currants was 
in 1911-12, 234,898 cwt., of which Victoria manufactured 149,713 cwt. and 
South Australia 81,346 cwt. 

All five mainland States raise table grapes, principally for Commonwealth 
consumption. Latterly, Western Australia has been making shipments of 
fresh grapes to England, and with a satisfactory measure of success. In 
the eastern States, the varieties most suitable for this purpose, such as 
Ohanez, Purple Cornichon, Flame Tokay, have been planted and are now 
coming into bearing, so that an extension of the export trade may be 
looked for. 

6. Fruit=growing. 

When we remember to what extent this industry depends on the export 
trade, Tasmania undoubtedly deserves the highest credit for her enterprise 
in building up a great export trade in apples. Practically unaided by State 
assistance in any form, the apple-growers of the island State despatched 
trial shipments, and paid the expenses of growers to watch the cargo during 
the voyage and to supervise its distribution in London. 

Contrast these tentative shipments in the eighties with the apple season 
to-day, during which a dozen or more large ocean steamers leave the port 
of Hobart alone, with fruit (mainly apples) for cargo, two or three boats 
being occasionally berthed alongside the wharves at the same time. 

The shipment last season from Hobart comprised 465,193 cases for the 
United Kingdom; 15,625 for Germany; 1,649 for Sweden and Denmark; 
and 49,720 for South America ; or 522,188 cases in all, as against 807,510 
for the previous season. Victoria despatches only about half this quantity ; 
but the industry is a growing one in all the States. 

The excellent machinery now manufactured for refrigerating purposes 
has rendered the shipment of such soft fruits as pears a success ; and with 
the extension of markets to other British ports than London, and to Europe, 
Canada, and other parts of the world, the industry may be regarded as only 
in its infancy. 

It is claimed that, by pre cooling, any variety of fruit may be carried 
with safety, and, certainly, the results of the experimental shipments of 
pre-cooled fruit seem to justify the statement. At the present time efforts 
are being made to secure better arrangements with the shipping companies ; 
and it is hoped as the result of the inquiries of a Commonwealth Royal 
Commission, that the export trade will be placed on a more satisfactory 
footing in every way. 



Pastoral and Agricultural Development op Australia. 409 

The small fruits do remarkably well in the cooler districts of the southern 
States, and particularly in Tasmania ; but, as these do not lend themselves 
to exportation, the trade is limited. 

7. Irrigation and Artesian Water. 

The name of Mildura, in North-western Victoria, naturally associates 
itself in the mind with the earliest efforts of irrigation in settlements. Indi- 
vidual irrigation had been carried on previously, but little had been heard 
publicly of the suitability of the Australian soil, climate, and rivers for 
extensive watering until Messrs. Chafiey Bros, obtained a concession from the 
Victorian Government and started work on the Murray River in 1884. From 
1887 to 1895 the management was carried on by Messrs. ChaSey Bros. Co. 
Ltd., when it was taken over by the First IMildura Irrigation Trust. Though 
the settlement passed through many hard times in its early years, those 
who survived are now in a very prosperous position. Various difficulties 
were at first met with — salt in the soil, inexperience in the suitable varieties 
of trees and \dnes, insufficient pumping power, etc. ; but, one by one, these 
difficulties were overcome. 

The main industries now are — currants, raisins, prunes, and other dried 
fruits. Some idea of the prosperity of this, the largest irrigation settlement 
in the Commonwealth, may be gathered from the fact that in 1911 
(Census) there were over 6,000 inhabitants and over 12,000 acres under 
cultivation. 

Renmark, also on the Murray, but in South Australia, was established 
a little later than Mildura. Its development was conducted more slowly ; 
and it, therefore, reaped a certain amount of benefit from the experience of 
the other settlement. Renmark has a population of 2,000, with 5,20u acres 
under cultivation, and an average production of about £100,000 per 
annum- 

As the result of an irrigation campaign, conducted by Mr. Alfred Deakin, 
who had visited India and America in search of information, various water 
trusts were established in the northern areas of Victoria in the late eighties 
and early nineties, many of them, however, only for watering stock. The 
largest of these, in the Goulburn Valley, also included a fruit-growing settle- 
ment at Ardmona, while a large extent of country was taken up to irrigate 
lucerne for fattening stock. Eventually the State wiped off most of the 
indebtedness of these trusts ; and, as the water was supplied very cheaply, 
prosperity in these areas became general. 

A new impetus was given to irrigation in Victoria during the early years 
of this century. In 1906, all State waterworks were vested in the State Rivers 
and Water Supply Commission of three members, and this Commission 
eventually took over the duties of the whole Water Supply Department, 
and, at a later date, the control of irrigation lands, which previously were 
vested in the Closer Settlement Board. This Board has done good work 
in concentrating the settlers on all new areas, and so lessening the cost of 
supplying water. 

Under the Closer Settlement Act a number of irrigable estates were 
bought up from private owners, subdivided, and settled mainly from over- 
seas, though Australians have also taken up some of the blocks. 



410 Federal Handbook. 



Where sufi&cient capital was available, and the settlers were hard-working, 
good progress has been made, and there is reasonable prospect of success. 
On blocks of 50 acres and upwards, dairying is carried on by means of lucerne 
and fodder crops, while, at the same time, small areas are planted with fruit 
trees, the dairying operations bringing in ready money during the time that 
the fruit trees are coming into bearing. 

As with all colonies of this nature, a good deal of tribidation will be ex- 
perienced before the settlers "make good." One great drawback is the absence 
■of markets in which to dispose of small products, such as vegetables, tomatoes, 
etc. ; but, when once the orchards are in bearing, with the ever-extending 
overseas markets, and the knowledge gained from the experience of the pio- 
neers in the fruit industry, a comfortable living should be made off these 
small areas. 

It is calculated that without taking into consideration waterworks con- 
structed for the supply of cities and towns, the various works vested in the 
Commission have a capital debit to the State of over £4,000,000. 

At the present time, a project is on foot for the construction of a 
storage reservoir near the source of the River Goulburn, which, if undertaken, 
will be perhaps the largest in the world. It is estimated that it will have a 
storage capacity of 60,000 million cubic feet, and some conception of its 
size may be obtained by comparing it with the Assouan Dam in Egypt, which 
holds 35,840 million feet. 

New" South Wales has constructed a large dam (Burrinjuck), across the 
■channel of the Murrumbidgee River, with an estimated capacity of 33,630 
million cubic feet of water, to be stored from the winter rains. The water will 
be run down the Murrumbidgee for 200 miles to the Berembed Weir, from 
which it will be carried by gravitation to the irrigation settlements. It will 
command 200,000 acres of first class land and 360,000 acres of second class 
land, which is estimated to support eventually 50,000 people. At present a 
number of settlers are on blocks, but have only just commenced operations. 
When the " Murray Waters " question is settled between the States of New 
South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia, far more use will be made of the 
great waterway for irrigation purposes. 

One cannot leave the subject of water supply in connexion with agricul- 
ture without some reference to the artesian supplies which have rendered 
so much of the interior country habitable and possible for stock raising. 
The artesian area has a width of about 900 miles in the latitude of Brisbane, 
stretching from Toowoomba to the overland telegraph Une. Bourke marks 
in a general way its southern limit, and in the north it runs to the Gulf of Car- 
pentaria, stretching from Cape York to west of the Gregory River. A 
■strip of the coast line in Western Australia is also recognised as 
artesian. 

Large sums of money have been spent by the Governments of most of 
the States in boring on stock routes, while a considerable amount of bores 
have been put down by private enterprise. The water obtained is 
chiefly used for stock, being too highly charged with carbonate of 
soda for irrigation purposes, though, to a limited extent, it is used for this 
purpose also. The yearly extension of the boundary of artesian water is 
adding more and more " safe " territory to the list. There are nearly 3,000 



Pastoral and Agricultural Development of Australia. 411 

bores in existence, both private and public. The deepest bore is over 5,000 
feet ; and the largest supply is from one in Queensland, which gives about 
4i^ million gallons per day. 

In the north-west of Victoria and in South Australia is a sub-artesian 
supply, the M^ater from which has only reached the surface in three bores ; 
but, in others, it comes within 80 feet and is pumped up for use. This sim- 
plifies the settlement of the Mallee districts, which are rapidly being converted 
into wheat-growing areas. Water is obtained from wells in most of the dis- 
tricts bordering on the Murray Kiver, even for 20 to 30 miles back from the 
frontage. These are from 80 feet to 100 feet deep, and the water which is 
often slightly brackish is pumped to the surface by windmills. 

8. Labour Conditions. 

Labour conditions cannot be regarded as quite satisfactory ; but there 
is much to be said on both sides. Skilled labour is practically unpro- 
curable, because a capable man can soon save enough to begin farming 
on Ms own account, and invariably does so, every inducement being offered 
in the shape of cheap land on extended terms, share-farming, etc. The 
consequence is that at harvest-time, the only labour available is not thoroughly 
efficient, though the demand is great and the pay high. In the dairying 
districts, there is constant scarcity of milkers ; and many are reducing their 
herds to the number which can be handled by their own family with milking 
machines, or else letting part of their farms to " share " men. In cropping, 
the niimber of acres put in by each farmer is likely to be reduced, particularly 
as this will enable more sheep to be carried, and a better system of rotation 
pursued. Larger implements and teams are also being used to curtail the 
employment of labour. The policy of irrigation, however, now being carried 
out by the various G-overnments should have the effect of relieving the 
situation to a certain extent, provided that the right class of immigrant 
is secured. Many of the small selectors will gladly put in a few weeks at 
harvesting or shearing, during the clearing of their own land. 

A few acres of land, with a cottage, a cow, pigs, and fowls, possibly a 
certain amount of crop on shares, with a security of tenure, should prove a 
good investment of capital for land-seekers; and should suit those who prefer 
the advantages of civilization to " roughing it " on a selection of their own. 
The position at the present time is as follows : — The Labourers Union 
has drawn up a " log " of prices and hours of labour for every branch of the 
great producing industry, and demands its acceptance by farmers, who 
would be agreeable in many instances, to the rates demanded, if they could 
obtain efficient workmen. The fixed hours they regard as impracticable. Even 
should these schedules become law, through the Arbitration Court, it will 
be necessary to compel every farmer to carry on his business in the same 
manner as at present, before the working class will materially benefit, and 
the question is raised wliether the industries requiring the most labour will 
be curtailed in favour of branches like grazing, in which very little labour 
is required. 

The pastoral industry, about twelve months ago, emerged from a pro- 
tracted suit before the Arbitration Court, whereby all conditions of labour 
and living are fixed. 

C.12{.H. '^ i> 



412 Federal Handbook. 



It has been said that little has been done by farmers as a body to make the 
conditions of living such as will induce labourers to remain for any length of 
time. The food is invariably good and plentiful, and often partaken with 
the farmer's family; but the "men's hut" with its bunks, for which the 
occupants must find the bedding, still represents the only shelter for labour. 
On some farms, in the newer districts, conditions are worse, and men are 
left to find sleeping accommodation during harvest in chafi house or machinery 
shed. Farmers themselves, having "roughed it" as selectors in their early 
years, do not give sufficient attention to this point, and have not realized that 
conditions are altered. Pastoralists, on the other hand, provide ample and 
good accommodation for shearers ; and the schedule determined by the 
Arbitration Court sets forth in precise terms the amount of sleeping and 
living space necessary for each man. • 

9. Agricultural Education. 

In some respects, the Commonwealth can point the way to the world 
in her system of agricultural education. For instance, there is an agitation 
in Great Britain just now to make the work at their institutions more 
practical, so that students shall take part in every farm operation. 
This has been a fundamental principle in Australia from the beginning. 
Colleges have been established in all the States, except Western 
Australia and Tasmania, and in the latter State one is in process of 
foundation. 

With the exception of Victoria, where they are under the control of a 
Council of Agricultural Education, the colleges are directly under the different 
departments of Agriculture, and are financed by State grants and their 
sale of produce. The fees are small at all the colleges, varying from £20 
to £35 per annum, so that the sons of men in every class of society can take 
advantage of the education offered. 

The object in view is to turn out young men who will go on the land ; 
and the curriculum is drawn up with this purpose. The methods adopted vary 
to some extent at the several colleges, but, in general, class-days and work-days 
alternate, the whole body of students being divided into two classes, one of 
which is working and the other in class on the same day. The farm work is 
apportioned according to the standing of the student, senior students being in 
charge of teams — ploughing, sowing, or harvesting, or at blacksmith's work, 
carpentry, shearing, separating, etc., according to the season of the year, 
junior students are occupied with milking, hoeing, carting, stablework, 
fencing, and the hundred and one odd pieces of work to be found 
on a farm. The work-list is usually changed each week, so that each 
student gets a fair share of the work. The class work embraces instruc- 
tion in agricultural chemistry, soil physics, farm engineering, botany, 
entomology, geology, and farm accounts, as well as the subjects pertaining 
to an ordinary commercial education. From the distribution of the farm 
work, it can be gathered that great advantages are attached to limiting the 
number of students, so that each may gain that knowledge which only 
practice can give. 

The course varies from two to three years, and the ages of students range 
from fifteen years upwards, the average being about eighteen. 



Pastoral and AaRicuLTURAL Development of Australia. 413 



In Victoria are a number of agricultural high schools designed to act as 
stepping-stones between the State school and the agricultural college. The 
various experimental farms in New South Wales provide accommodation for 
students, whose time is mainly given to practical work, and in Western 
Australia similar provision has been made. A Chair of Agriculture has been 
established in New South Wales and Victoria, and the colleges are affiliated 
with the University, undergraduates who take the course of agricultural 
science being required to do a certain amount of field work at the 
agricultural college. 

Instruction classes for those already on the land are conducted in nearly 
every State, but in this respect Australia falls short of the standard realized in 
the IFnited States. This to a great extent is due to her scattered population 
and to the fact that there is no '' off " season in Australia, when farm 
work cannot be followed. The earliest students who passed through the 
colleges are now beginning to occupy prominent positions in the agricul- 
tural world, and the training is better appreciated by the public ; but farmers 
are not availing themselves of the agricultural high schools to the extent hoped 
for nor have they ever taken full advantage of the colleges for their sons. 
The majority of students, of whom the total according to the latest return 
is 630, comes from the professional and mercantile classes. Most of the 
students are too young, after finishing a college course, to undertake farming 
for themselves, they therefore pursue the wiser plan of gaining further 
experience on good farms, where the handling of men and the business of 
buying and selling can be learned. 

10. Land Tenure. 

It is not possible to cover in a few paragraphs the systems of the various 
States, which differ considerably. They may, however, be considered under 
the broad headings of leases or licences, conditional purchases, free grants, 
and cash purchases. 

Leases are generally for pastoral purposes, the lessees being the pioneers 
who take up new country, which they usually improve considerably before 
being ousted by the selector. The immense stations containing hundreds of 
thousands of acres are now confined to the interior and northern parts of the 
Commonwealth, the rents for which are only a few shillings per acre. There 
are, however, large leasehold blocks in all the States, usually of rough land 
not fit for cultivation, and devoted to sheep or cattle. Lessees are usually 
allowed to select so many acres out of their leased land. 

The conditional purchase is the usual method of acquiring land in all 
the States. The age limit at which land may be secured varies fi-om sixteen 
to eighteen years ; the area, from 200 acres to 2,500 acres, according to 
locality or conditions of the Land Act ; and the price, from a few shillings to 
£1 per acre. As a rule, the survey fee and some deposit must be paid at 
the beginning, the full amount being paid off by yearly instalments, in 
different periods ranging up to 40 years. In some cases no payments are 
required for several years ; and, in all, the rate of interest is very low, prin- 
cipal and interest together amounting to not more than 6 or 7 per cent. 
Improvements must be carried out to a certain amount each year, and 
residence for so many months in the year is usually insisted upon. 

2 D 2 



414 Federal Handbook 



The holder of a block on conditional purchase is termed, in all the States, 
a selector. As a rule, at first, only a licence to occupy is given ; then, when 
the terms have all been faithfuly observed for several years, a lease is issued 
which is negotiable. At any time after the issue of the lease, by paying 
the remainder of the purchase money in cash, a grant may be obtained. 

These are the terms under which the great bulk of the land in Australia 
has been alienated. The maximum area in the early days was 320 acres, 
but it is noticeable that very few farms in the wheat-growing districts are as 
small as this — 1,000 acres being more nearly the average holding. In the 
heavily timbered coastal districts, the smaller area has proved quite sufficient, 
as the land is rich, the rainfall good, and the cost of clearing very heavy. 
In New South Wales, leased land in the western districts is being resumed 
and subdivided for selection, while in Victoria and South Australia, 
settlement is now taking place mainly in the Mallee lands of the north, 
which can be cheaply cleared for the plough by rolling down the scrub and 
then burning it off. Queensland and Western Australia have greater areas 
of Crown lands unalienated, and are attracting settlers from all the States 
and from overseas by their liberal ofiers. 

Closer Settlement Acts have been passed in every State, by means of which 
estates have been purchased in settled districts, subdivided, and disposed 
of on extended terms The earliest subdivisions, which were in Victoria, 
turned out very successful ; and enabled many men with small capital to 
obtain farms. Latterly, most of the eSort has been directed to settling those 
estates which are commanded by irrigation channels. Provision has been 
made for loans to settlers in proportion to the amount of capital sunk in 
improvements. 

In every State free grants are made for educational, religious, or recrea- 
tion purposes, but only in Queensland and Western Australia are they made 
for settlement. In Queensland the maximum area which may be selected as a 
free homestead is 160 acres. The selector must reside on the block for five 
years and must fence it in or make improvements of equal value. 

In cash purchases from the Crown, as a rule, the land must be put up at 
public auction, an upset price being fixed. In all the States are credit 
systems under which farmers can obtain advances on easy terms on the 
value of their land and improvements. 

U. Forestry. 

This subject is closely connected with land settlement, and most de- 
plorable has been the ruthless destruction of valuable timber in every State, 
during the process of agricultui'al development. Forests have disappeared 
before the axe and fixe of the selectors, and now, in the settled districts, 
a great scarcity of timber for fencing, firewood, and building purposes is 
noticeable. 

Forest reserves were made early in the history of Australia, but these 
were mainly to preserve timber for the use of the mining industry. 

South Australia has had for many years a well-organized Forestry Depart- 
ment, which, in many respects, has been an example to the rest of the 
Commonwealth. Of late years, greater attention has been paid to the pre- 
servation of existing timber and the replanting of areas with the best of 



Pastoral and Agricultural Development of Australia. 415 

native and foreign timbers. All the States have established State nurseries 
and plantations, from which are distributed, at the cost of the labour in 
packing, to public bodies and farmers, trees of native woods, such as the 
many eucalypts, acacias, and native pines, as well as foreign trees, 
mainly pines and pepper-trees, while a few oaks, willows, etc., have also 
been grown. In this way encouragement is given to the growth of shelter 
belts, the thinning of which affords a useful amount of timber. 

In Victoria has been established a Forestry School, where subjects per- 
taining to this important industry are taught, as well as the practice in the 
growth and improvement of plantations and forests, and the employment of 
timber. There is also a course in forestry at the Adelaide School of Mines. 

Of late an increased interest in forestry has been evinced in all the 
States, due to conferences held in Sydney and Melbourne ; and it is hoped 
that further wanton destruction will be prevented, and that replanting will 
repair the damage which would eventually have so injurious an effect on the 
climate and soil of the Commonwealth. 



416 Federal Handbook. 



CHAPTER X. 

MINING FIELDS OF AUSTRALIA. 

By E. F. Pittman, A.R.S.M., Government Geologist of New South Wales, and 
A. Gibb Maitland, F.G.S., Government Geologist of Western Australia. 

SYNOPSIS. 

1. New South Wales, by E. F. Pittman. I 6. Northern Territory, by A. Gibb 

2. Victoria, by E. F. Pittman. j Maitland. 

3. Queensland, by E. F. Pittman. i 7. South Australia, by A. Gibb Mait- 

4. Tasmania, by E. F. Pittman. land. 

5. Western Australia, by A. Gibb I 

Maitland. ! 

1. New South Wales. 

Since the discovery of payable gold by Hargraves at the junction of 
Lewis Ponds and Summer Hill Creek, in 1851, mining has been one of the most 
important factors in the prosperity of New South Wales. It was the easily- 
won alluvial gold which first attracted population to our shores, but subse- 
quent prospecting revealed the occurrence of rich deposits of almost all the 
known useful metals and minerals, and the permanence of the Mining 
Industry in the mother State of Australia is now assured. 

Goal. — Unquestionably the most important of the New South Wales' 
mineral assets is her coal, and in regard to both its quality and quantity she 
has been most liberally endowed by Nature. 

Coal seams of several geological ages have been found in the State, but 
it is only from rocks of the Permo-Carbonif erous period that coal of commercial 
value is obtained. 

The Permo-Carboniferous System has been classified as follows, in 

descending order : — Thickness in Feet. 

1. Upper or Newcastle Coal Measujes, containing 

twelve seams. In the aggregate they contain 

35 to 40 feet of workable coal . . . . 1,400 to 1,500 

2. Dempsey series ; freshwater beds containing no 

coaf .. .. .. .. .. 2,200 

3. Middle, or Tomago, or East Maitland Coal Measures, 

containing six seams of coal, varying from 3 to 
7 feet in thickness. In the aggregate they 
contain 18 feet of workable coal . . . . 500 to 1,800 

4. Upper Marine Series . . . . . . . . 5,000 to 6,400 

5. Lower, or Greta Coal Measures, containing an 

aggregate of about 20 feet of coal . . . . 100 to 300 

6. Lower Marine Series . . . . . . . . 4,800 

17,000 



Mining Fields op Australia. 417 



There are four important coal-fields in New South Wales, viz., the Mait- 
land, the Newcastle, the lUawarra or Southern, and the Lithgow or Western. 
In the Maitland field the Greta and also the Tomago coal seams are worked, 
while in the other three fields the coal is obtained from the Upper or Newcastle 

Measures. 

The Greta Coal Measures never exceed 300 feet in thickness, nevertheless 
they contain two seams of splendid coal, viz., the Upper Seam fi'om 14 to 
32 feet in thickness, and the Lower Seam from 3 to 11 feet in thickness. 
The quality of this coal is superior to that of any other coal in Australia, 
and it is especially suitable for household and gas-making purposes, and also 
for steam raising. Eleven collieries are at work on this coal between Mait- 
land and Cessnock, a distance of 15 miles, and their aggregate output for the 
year 1912 was 3,074,598 tons. 

The average composition of the coal from the Greta Coal Measures, as 
calculated from the analyses of 31 representative samples, is as follows : — 

Hygroscopic moisture . . . . 1 '89 

Volatile Hydrocarbons . . . . 41 '35 

Fixed Carbon .. .. .. .. 50*51 

Ash .. .. .. .. .. 6-25 



100-00 



Calorific value .. .. .. 13*2 

The Greta Measures are known to extend at intervals to near the Queens- 
land border. 

The Newcastle Coal-field has supplied most of the coal raised in New South 
Wales during the last 50 years ; many of the collieries, however, are now 
about worked out, and their owners have opened new mines in the neigh- 
bouring Maitland field. The Newcastle coal, most of which is obtained from 
the Borehole Seam (occurring near the base of the series) is of good quality 
for household and gas-making purposes. Its average composition as cal'Mi- 
lated from the analyses of 78 representative samples is as follows : — 

Hygroscopic moisture .. .. .. 2*01 

Volatile Hydrocarbons .. .. 36*01 

Fixed Carbon .. .. .. 53*27 

Ash .. .. .. .. 8*71 



100*00 



Calorific value .. .. .. 12*7 

The Illawarra or Southern Coal-field is situated around Bulli as a centre, 
aad is about 150 miles south of Newcastle. The Upper Coal Measures are 
worked here also, but in the uppermost seam of the series (known as the 
Bulli seam), and the coal is of a totally different character from that of New- 
castle, being essentially a steam coal of good quality. It also makes a 
splendid hard coke suitable for smelting purposes. 



418 Federal Handbook. 



The average composition of the coal from the Southern Coal-field, as 
calculated from 35 analyses of representative samples, is as follows : — 
Hygroscopic Moisture .. .. .. 0*71 

Volatile Hydrocarbons .. .. 23*65 

Fixed Carbon .. .. .. 63-98 

Ash .. .. .. .. 11-66 



100-00 



Calorific value .. .. .. 12*68 

The Lithgow or Western Coal-field is situated on the Western Railway, 
95 miles from Sydney, and here again the coal is obtained from the Upper 
Coal Measures, but in this instance from the lowest seam of the series. It 
is essentially a steam coal, but of rather inferior quality to that obtained fr'om 
the Southern Coal-field. 

Its average composition, as calculated from the analyses of 25 carefriUy 
taken samples, is as follows : — 

Hygroscopic Moisture .. .. .. 2*05 

Volatile Hydrocarbons .. .. 32-31 

Fixed Carbon .. .. .. 53-08 

Ash.. .. .. .. .. 12*56 



100-00 



Calorific value .. .. .. 11*9 

The Upper Coal Measures have been proved to be continuous between 
Newcastle on the north and lUawarra on the south ; and also between 
Sydney on the east and Lithgow on the west. The uppermost coal seam 
of the series occurs at a depth of nearly 3,000 feet under Sydney, where it 
is being worked by the Sydney Harbor Collieries Limited. 

It is extremely difficult to estimate the total quantity of coal available 
in New South Wales, owing to the comparatively small amount of prospecting 
which has been done. Assuming, however, that 10 feet of workable coal 
underlies the area known to be coal-bearing, and allowing for a loss of one- 
third of the gross weight in working, it is calculated that there must be 
115,346,880,000 tons of available coal in the Permo-Carboniferous Measures 
within a depth of 4,000 feet. 

Kerosene Shale. — A petroliferous mineral which is a variety of Torbanite 
and is locally known as Kerosene Shale, has been worked with much success 
in past years at Joadja, near Mittagong, and at Hartley Vale, near Mount 
Victoria. Both these deposits, however, have been worked out, and the 
most important deposits now known are those of the Capertee Valley (the 
property of the Commonwealth Oil Corporation), in the parish of Megalong, 
near Katoomba, Doughboy Hollow, near Murrurundi, and Marangaroo, near 
Lithgow. 

This mineral occurs as lenticular patches or seams, rarely more than a mile 
in length or width, on certain horizons of the Upper Coal Measures of Permo- 
Carboniferous age. The seams vary in thickness from an inch or two up to 
4 ft. 6 in., the one in the Capertee Valley being about 4 ft. 3 in. and of fair 
quality. 



Mining Fields of Australia. 419 



Gold. — Althougli for many years the value of the gold won in New South 
Wales exceeded that of any other mineral, after the exhaustion of the easily 
won alluvial deposits there was a considerable drop in the production of the 
precious metal. It is true that auriferous reefs have been worked in many 
widely separated localities, and in a number of cases with very successful 
results. Speaking generally, however, the reefs have not been found payable 
at considerable depths, and the returns from gold mining have consequently 
been irregular. In times of general prosperity there is always a falling off 
in the gold yield, whereas, when other and more payable employment fails, 
people turn their attention to prospecting for gold, and the yield improves. 
Amongst the most important gold-fields which have been worked in the 
State may be mentioned Forbes, Parkes, Young, Kiandra, Gulgong, Grenfell, 
Wattle Flat, Sofala. Hargraves, Hill End, Lucknow, Temora, Wyalong, 
Pambula, Hillgrove, etc. Most of these fields are still producing gold, 
although the mining industry has not been very prosperous at any of them 
for some years. 

The mines of the Cobar field are at present the chief gold producers, and 
of these the Mount Boppy holds the pride of place. In this mine there is an 
interbedded auriferous quartz deposit of the type known as a saddle lode 
(inverted), which occupies the spaces formed by the folding of schistose 
rocks, which are probably of Pre-Silurian age. The deposit has been worked 
to a depth of about 800 feet, and mining operations are still being successfully 
carried on. 

A considerable amount of alluvial gold is still being recovered fi'om the 
beds of rivers by means of dredges, the use of which has been of great assist- 
ance to the mining industry during the past decade. 

Silver-Lead. — The most important silver-lead field in Australia is situated 
at Broken Hill, in the north-west of New South Wales. It was discovered 
in 1883 by Charles Rasp, who marked out a lease under the impression that 
the ore was tin-stone. 

The Broken Hill lode occurs in highly altered rooks, such as schists, 
gneisses, garnet sandstones, and banded quartzites, which have been in- 
truded by dykes of very coarse pegmatite. These rocks are probably of 
Lower Cambrian age. They have been much folded, and in a space thus 
caused an enormous interbedded lode of the type of the Bendigo saddle 
lodes has been formed. The cap of the lode consisted of manganiferous 
ironstone, and formed the summit of a low range about 21 miles long. Under 
the cap of the lode extremely rich oxidized ores consisting of carbonate of 
lead and kaolin with chloride of silver and native silver were found. These 
ores occurred for a width of several hundred feet in places, and beneath 
them were mixed sulphides of lead and zinc with a high silver content. As 
greater depth was attained, the proportions of silver, lead, and zinc in the 
ore declined, and the gangue consisted of rhodonite, making it very hard to 
crush. Owing, however, to improved methods of treatment, and more 
particularly the adaptation of the flotation process, the mines have been 
enabled to profitably exploit the poorer ore, and the mining industry at 
Broken Hill is in a most flourishing condition to-day. The greatest depth 
so far reached by any mine at Broken Hill is 1,815 feet, in Block 10. 



420 Federal Handbook. 



In addition to silver, lead, and zinc, the Broken Hill ore contains a small 
proportion of gold and copper. The aggregate value of the metals produced 
by the principal mines on the lode up to the end of the year 1912 was 
£70,182,124, and the sum of £16,177,580 was paid to the shareholders. 

Another silver-lead field, where the mining industry has been in a flourish- 
ing condition during the past twelve years, though on a much smaller scale 
than at Broken Hill, is known as Yerranderie, and is situated about 80 miles 
south-west of Sydney. The country rock consists of quartz-felspar-porphyry 
overlain in places by the Permo-Carboniferous Coal Measures. Lodes of 
6 inches to 4 feet in thickness of argentiferous galena occur in the porphyry 
dipping at an angle of about 28°. Mining operations have been carried on 
in these lodes under considerable difficulties, there being no railway to the 
field, and the ore having to be carried over mountainous roads to Camden 
at a cost of £2 to £2 5s. per ton. Nevertheless the returns have been steadily 
progressive. 

Copper. — New South Wales possesses many copper mines, but in a majority 
of them work has been carried on intermittently, owing to the fluctuations 
in the price of the metal. When the value of copper falls below a certain 
figure there are mines which cannot make a profit, and it becomes necessary 
to close therii down ; with a rise in price, and the probability of its being 
maintained for some time, such mines resume operations, and a period of 
prosperity is entered upon. 

Amongst the most important copper fields may be mentioned Cobar, 
Nymagee, Shuttleton, Mount Hope, Girilambone, Burraga, Cangai, Gulf 
Creek, Blayney, Cow Flat, and Orange Plains. 

The Great Cobar Copper Mine is undoubtedly the most important mine 
of its class at present worked. It is situated 464 miles west of Sydney, 
with which it is connected by rail. The lode occurs in slates of probably 
Pre-SUurian age, and consists of three immense lenses of ore which are the 
results of replacement of the slates. The ore bodies vary in width from a 
thread up to 100 feet, and they are at present being worked at a depth of 
1,500 feet. Ore only showed at one point on the surface, and there was 
nothing there to indicate the enormous ore bodies which were afterwards 
found below. Cobar copper ore contains a variable proportion of gold, 
and near the surface it was extremely rich, as will be realized when it is stated 
that in the early years of the mine's history, the copper produced was con- 
veyed by bullock drays for a distance of nearly 300 miles, and paid hand- 
somely notwithstanding. As the workings progressed in depth the ore 
became poorer in both copper and gold, and at the present time is worth 
about 2*5 per cent, of the former and nearly 1 dwt. of the latter per ton. 
The Great Cobar ore, being of a basic character, is treated by partially 
ppitic smelting in conjunction with silicious ores (containing a little copper 
and gold) fi'om the Cobar Gold Mine, the Chesney Mine, and the Great Peak 
Mine, which are all owned by the same company. There are two other lodes 
(known respectively as the " Middle " and " Eastern ") parallel to the one 
which is being worked. Neither of these has been adequately prospected, 
and it is quite possible that they may yet be found to contain valuable ore 
bodies of a similar character to those already exploited. 



Mining Fields of Australia. 421 



The Great Cobar Field has already produced about 100,000 tons of 
copper, 500,000 ozs. of gold, and 1,250,000 ozs. of silver, the aggregate value 
of which amounts to about £8,000,000. 

Tin. — Tin ore was first discovered in commercial quantities at Elmore, 
near Inverell, and shortly afterwards at EmmaviUe in the year 1872. Large 
quantities of stream tin were subsequently recovered from both districts, 
at fixst by means of ordinary sluicing appliances, and more recently by pump 
dredges, which are still employed. Most of the stream tin has been derived 
from stanniferoiis greisen, in which the cassiterite occurs as scattered grains, 
which become concentrated by the action of running water as the greisen is 
decomposed. Stanniferous lodes also occur, but are not often met with. 
The most important tin-bearing lodes are the Ottery lodes at Tent Hill 
(not being worked at present), and Butler's Lode, 8 miles north of Emmaville. 

Tin-bearing pipes are also a feature of the Emmaville District. Thev 
occur in granite and are oval or cylindrical in form, and generally a few feet 
in diameter. Their downward course is irregular and limited to 30 or 40 feet. 
The tinstone is disseminated through a gangue of felspar quartz and chlorite, 
and is frequently present in the proportion of 50 per cent. 

Alluvial tin ore also occurs in granite country at Dora Dora, 40 miles east 
of Albury, and lodes of tinstone and wolfram traverse granitic rocks at 
Jingellic, 20 miles further east. At Tabletop, near Wagga, tinstone and wol- 
fram are found both in lodes and alluvial deposits. 

At Euriowie, north of Broken Hill, tinstone occurs in coarse crystals 
scattered through pegmatite dykes. Attempts have been made to work these 
deposits, but the cost of freight from such an outlying district is almost 
prohibitive. 

The most recent discovery of tin ore in New South Waies was at Ardlethan, 
a town on the railway, about 40 miles west of Temora. The ore is found in 
lenticular chutes in granite close to its junction with Silurian slates. In 
one instance blocks of ore, weighing as much as a ton, and containing 50 per 
cent, of tin, were found lying on the surface. Considerable activity has been 
displayed on this field since its discovery, and if the deposits are found to 
maintain their values to a depth, it should have a prosperous future. 

Iron. — Deposits of iron-ore are found in various localities in New South 
Wales, the most important being situated at Coombing Park near the town 
of Carcoar, and at Cadia, about 14 miles west of Orange. The first-named 
deposit has been estimated to contain 2,571,000 tons. It has been quarried 
to a considerable extent by the Messrs. Hoskins Brothers, who have estab- 
lished iron smelting works at Lithgow. The ore consists of an intimate 
mixture of limonite and hematite in varying proportions, and the analysis 
of a bulk sample yielded 55*8 per cent, of metallic iron, 7*45 per cent, of 
silica, and '396 phosphoric anhydride. The Cadia deposit consists of beds 
of hematite and magnetite which have been estimated to contain about 
39,000,000 tons, much of which is said to be suitable for the production of 
steel by the Bessemer process. 

Iron smelting works are also in course of erection at Newcastle. They 
are the property of the Broken Hill Proprietary Silver Mining Company, 
and it is proposed to bring the ore from their Iron Knob Mine in South 
Australia. 



422 Federal Handbook. 



Aluminium. — -Bauxite, the mineral from which aluminium is made, 
and which consists principally of alumina, is found in several districts in the 
State, as at Parish of Wingello, County of Camden, and also near Emmaville 
and Inverell, where it occurs both in the pisolitic and massive forms. These 
deposits are not being utilized at present for the manufacture of aluminium, 
but there is no doubt that attention will be attracted to them in the future. 

Antimony. — The principal mining field where stibnite, or sulphide of 
antimonv, is found in quantity, is Hillgrove, 20 miles east of Armidale, where 
it is associated with gold and scheelite. Antimony mining, however, is a 
spasmodic industry, owing to the fluctuations in the price of the metal. There 
is not much demand for antimony at present, and consequently the mines 
are not being worked. 

Bismuth and Molybdenum. — Ores of bismuth associated with molybdenite 
are found at Kingsgate, 18 miles east of Glen Innes. The deposits consist 
of pipes similar in form to those in which tin occurs near Emmaville. The 
Kingsgate pipes intersect granite rocks near their junction with slate. They 
are roughly circular or oval in section, and descend irregularly, dipping at 
an average angle of 30° towards the Junction of the two formations. Indi- 
vidual pipes have been worked for a distance of 460 feet on the underlie. 
The gangue is quartz, and this is impregnated with molybdenite, native 
bismuth, sulphide, carbonate, and oxide of bismuth. 

Similar deposits occur at Pheasant Creek, 30 miles north-east, and also 
at Whipstick, 14 miles fi-om Pambula on the South Coast. In the last- 
named occurrence the gangue consists of quartz and felspar with a little mica 
and garnet. 

Tungsten. — Scheelite and wolfram occur in many localities in the State ; 
the former is worked pretty extensively at Hillgrove, where it occurs, associ- 
ated with stibnite, in auriferous quartz reels in intrusive granite near its 
junction with slate. 

Although wolfram is widely distributed in New South Wales, its occurrence 
in commercial quantities is rare. The wolfram mining industry is, however, 
in a prosperous condition at Torrington, to the north of Emmaville, where it 
occurs in association with bismuth. 

The sedimentary rocks of the neighbourhood are believed to be the lower 
marine (Gympie) beds of the Permo-Carboniferous system. They have 
been intruded by granite, and subsequently both granite and slate have been 
intruded by a rock which now consists largely of secondary silica and con- 
tains also topaz, wolfram, and bismuth. This rock is believed to be an 
altered granite, and the name topaz-greisen has been proposed for it. 

The wolfram occurs in crystals scattered through the greisen ; also 
more plentifully in quartz veins penetrating that rock, and again in pegmatite 
dykes associated with it. 

Diamonds are won from alluvial drifts at Copeton, 17 miles from Inverell. 
A Dutch Company has recently been formed to extract diamonds from the 
dolerite matrix in which they have been proved to occur at Oakey and Staggy 
Creeks in the same district. 

Opal. — Precious opal occurs in veins or seams in a soft, white siliceous 
rock in the Desert Sandstone Series, of Upper Cretaceous age. It is ex- 
tensively worked at two widely separated localities, viz., at White Cliffs, 



Mining Fields^of Australia. 



423 



north of Wilcannia, and at Lightning Ridge, north of "Walgett. In the last- 
•named phice the rare variety known as black opal, of great beauty and value, 
is obtained. 

Alunite or Alumstone. — This mineral occurs in considerable quantity 
at Bullah Delah, where a mountain 900 feet high is largely composed of it. 
The alunite appears to have been formed from the decomposition of rhyo- 
lites, which form the base of the mountain. The mineral is partially treated 
on the ground, and then exported to Scotland for the manufacture of alum. 

Table showing the Quantity and Value of the Minerals won during 
THE Year 1912, and to the End of 1912. 

New South Wales. 





Production for Y( 


ar Ending 


Total Production to 31st December 




31st Decembei 


, 1912. 




1912. 




MineraL 
















Quantitj 




Value. 


Quantitj 




Value. 


Coal 


9,885,815 


tons 


£ 
3,660,015 


181,595,980 tons 


£ 
69,087,688 


Gold 


165,295 


oz. 
fine 


702,129 


13,998,775 


oz. 
fine 


59,462,975 


Silver 


2,389,195 


oz. 


251,652 


26,194,502 


oz. 


3,328,713 


Copper 


11,034 tons 


579,791 


216,073 


tons 


11,784,102 


Tin 


2,075 


,j 


338,074 


105,144 


„ 


9,327,609 


Lead 


17,251 


,, 


264,530 


138,191 


,, 


2,000,911 


Antimony 


62 


,, 


355 


16,653 


,, 


305,225 


Opal 






35,008 






1,330,207 


Wolfram 


i72 


tons 


16,584 


1,357 


tons 


132,517 


Manganese 








577 


,, 


1,662 


Bismuth 


6 


tons 


1,210 


541 


,, 


128,537 


Molybdenite . . 


57 




3,706 


304 


„ 


36,036 


Limestone 


33,186 




11.066 


1,124,671 


,, 


702,814 


Lronstone 


1,093 




761 


106,917 


,, 


81,618 


ScheeUte 


56 




4,963 


1,130 


,, 


100,848 


L:on 


32,677 


,, 


130,708 


337,445 




2,113,786 


Lron Oxide 


3,757 


" 


4,763 


23,696 




30,748 


Lime . . . . 


35,657 


99 


44,478 


307,553 




277,927 


Portland Cement 






368,280 






1,839,684 


Shale (oU) 


86,018 


tons 


34,770 


1,651,434 tons 


2,322,831 


Diamonds 


2,239 


cts. 


2,001 


178,970 


cts. 


120,408 


Alunite 


3,425 tons 


13,700 


39,035 


tons 


119,543 


Chrome 


23 


JJ 


60 


30,835 


,, 


101,468 


Marble 






1,340 






23,064 


Platinum 


610 


ozs. 


3,880 


12,990 


ozs. 


29,010 


♦Stone (building, etc.) . . 






559 






24,176 


*Slates 








79,234 




890 


Cobalt 








885 


tons 


8.065 


Coke 


241,159 


tons 


162,454 


3,012,083 


,, 


2,138,667 


Quicksilver 








1,010 lbs. 


126 


♦Grindstones . . 






'"l76 






2,842 


Zinc (metal and concen- 














trates) 


520,518 


tons 


1,766,242 


2,819,718 


tons 


7,539,913 


Silver, Lead Ore Concen- 














trates, etc. . . 


345,307 


,, 


3,229,614 


7,442,007 


,, 


54,892,276 


Sundry Minerals 






8,566 






122,084 


Totals . . 




11,641,435 




229,618,970 



* Quantity and value exported. 



424 Federal Handbook. 

2. Victoria. 

Although gold was first discovered in New South Wales, it was in 
Victoria (which was proclaimed a separate Colony about this time, viz., 
1st July, 1851) that the richest and most extensive gold-fields occurred. 
Most of these fields were found immediately after a reward of 200 giiineas 
had been offered for the discovery of a gold-field within 200 miles of 
Melbourne. 

The alluvial gold deposits of Anderson's Creek were discovered on 5th 
July, 1851, those of Buninyong on 8th August, Ballarat on 8th September, 
and Bendigo on 10th December. Many other alluvial fields were found within 
a few months, and the immediate result was a large influx of people all eager 
to prospect for gold. In the following year 1852, there were 40,000 men 
at Ballarat, a like number at Bendigo, and 25,000 at Castlemaine, in addition 
to the many thousands who were scattered over the smaller fields. The 
output of gold in Victoria for the year 1852 was 2,218,782 ozs., valued at 
£8,875,128, while in 1856 it rose to its maximum, viz., 2,985,991 ozs., valued 
at £11,943,964. For many years afterwards the value of the gold yield 
exceeded five millions sterling, and the foundations of Victoria's present 
prosperity, as well as the formation of her principal townships, was thus the 
direct result of the discovery of the gold-fields. 

Auriferous Lodes.-— Th.Q auriferous quartz mining areas of Victoria have 
been classified as follows : — (1) the Western or Lower Ordovician group, 
including Ballarat, Bendigo, Castlemaine, Stawell, Ararat, and Maryborough 
districts; (2) the Central or Silurian group, including the Walhalla, Wood's 
Point, and Upper Yarra fields ; and (3) the Eastern group, including the 
Upper Ordovician and the extensive metamorphic series of Bethanga, Mount 
Wills, and Cassilis districts. 

Ballarat. — The auriferous lodes of Ballarat occur in an area of acutely 
but irregularly folded slates and sandstones which are believed to be of 
Ordovician age. The axes of the folds have a meridional strike, and the anti- 
clines and synclines follow an easterly and westerly dip. 

In Ballarat East a zone of these slates and sandstones about 350 feet in 
width has been proved favorable to the occurrence of gold, but it is only when 
these beds have an easterly dip that the intersecting reefs are profitable. 
These beds are traversed and faulted by north and south felsite dykes. ' The 
faults are known locally as " leather jackets," because they usually contain 
a layer of leathery " pug " or " casing," which can be removed in sheets. 
The " leather jackets " form the foot- walls of extensive quartz formations 
(often up to 40 feet in width) from which spurs frequently extend westwards, 
and these deposits have produced great quantities of gold. 

A second series of dykes (limburgites) intruded the Ballarat gold-field 
in an east and west direction at a date subsequent to the formation of the 
quartz reefs, and probably had some influence upon their enrichment. 

A very interesting feature of Ballarat East is the occurrence of what are 
termed " indicators," which have been found to have a distinct relation to 
certain deposits of gold. The indicators are thin beds of slate (and sometimes 
sandstone) which usually contain pyrites, and occasionally a little quartz. 



Mining Fields of Australia. 425 



They occur in the 350 feet of favorable beds previously referred to, and are 
therefore usually intersected and faulted by the " leather jackets." The 
most persistent and important of these occurrences is known as " The Indi- 
cator " ; it consists of a slate bed one-eighth of an inch thick with a pyritous 
seam running through it. There is no gold in the Indicator itself, but wherever 
it is intersected by quartz veins the latter are found to contain deposits 
of gold, frequently in the form of slugs or masses weighing hundreds of ounces. 

Other analogous beds are known as " the Western Indicator," " the 
4-ft. slate," " the 12-ft. slate," and " the big sandstone." Much more gold, 
however, has been obtained form the large quartz formations of Ballarat 
East than from the slugs found at the intc'section of quartz veins with the 
indicators. 

The greater part of Ballarat West is covered by a thickness of about 
400 feet of basalt, of which there are four distinct flows, together with alluvial 
clays and gravels. Beneath this covering are the folded slates and sandstones, 
and these include a favorable series of beds 80 feet wide, containing four 
black graphitic slate beds, which appear to have had a marked effect upon 
the deposition of the gold. Payable lodes have only been found within the 
80-ft. zone, and again only where these beds have a westerly dip. The three 
principal lodes are the Consols, or most easterly, the G-uiding Star, and the 
Albion, or most westerly. Other important lodes are the Phoenix, an inverted 
saddle, and the Prince of Wales, which is situated on the southern end of the 
field. The Consols lode has been as much as 70 feet wide on the anticline, 
and 50 feet in the syncline, and it averaged 4 feet in width down to a depth 
of 1,000 feet in the celebrated Band and Albion mine. Following a southerly 
pitch this lode was worked to a depth of nearly 3,000 feet in adjoining mines. 
The Guiding Star lode was payable for 5,000 feet in length, and the Albion 
line of lode has been tracea for 4 miles. The black slate horizon on the Albion 
anticline has been denuded for a distance of several thousand feet, shedding 
the rich alluvial gold deposits for which this portion of the field was famous. 
Below the favorable black slate zone there appears to be a thickness of about 
1,000 feet of barren rocks, while above it tbere are indications of other 
favorable strata. 

The two most profitable quartz mines at Ballarat West were the Band and 
Albion Consols, which paid £252,001 in dividends, and the Star of the East, 
which paid £284,400. 

Bendigo is at present the most prosperous gold-field in Victoria, and is also 
the one where mining operations have been carried to the greatest depth. The 
field has a length of about 15 miles by a width of 3, and it may be regarded 
as the type-district of the lodes known as saddle-reefs. The prevailing rocks 
are slates and sand.stoncs of Lower Ordovician age, but at Harcourt, about 
15 miles to the south, an intrusive massif of granite has altered the sediments 
for a distance of 25 chains from the junction. The sedimentary series has 
been thrown into a remarkably regular succession of anticlinal and synclinal 
folds, whose axes have a strike of about N. 16° W. ; moreover, the beds 
undulate in this direction as well as in that at right angles to it, though not 
to the same extent. A section across the field from east to west would there- 
fore show the slates and sandstones bent into a regular series of corrugations, 



1:26 Federal Handbook. 



while a noitli and south, section would show a similar formation in a less pro- 
nounced degree. Owing to the bending or folding of the strata, lune-shaped 
cavities or spaces have been formed between contiguous beds, the spaces 
being widest at the tops of the anticlines and at the bases of the synclines, 
and thinning out gradually between the two. In these spaces auriferous 
quartz has subsequently been deposited, and the lodes thus formed have 
received the name of saddle-reefp, owing to their resemblance to a saddle 
in cross-section. The thickest part of the reef is called the cap of the saddle, 
while the eastern and western extensions are termed the legs. In the case 
of a perfectly formed saddle-reef occupying the dome of an anticline it will 
be understood that the deposit will have a quaquaversaJ dip, and will gradually 
taper out to nothing in a downward direction. The anticlinal axes are locally 
known as " centre-country," and fifteen of these nearly parallel axes have been 
proved to carry saddle-reefs the distance from one to the next ranging from 
300 to 1,300 feet. The angle of dip of the beds varies considerably, but 
th.e average is about 65°. The caps of the reefs are often from 20 to 30 feet 
in width, and even more in thickness or height, but the legs are seldom more 
than 3 or 4 feet wide, and they rarely extend downwards for a greater depth 
than 100 feet. Saddle-reefs recur in depth, and as many as 24 of them have 
been met with in a depth of 2,200 feet in the Lazarus mine. The sedimentary 
rocks have been intruded by a series of small monchiquite dykes, locally 
known as " lava streaks," which have also intersected and in many instances 
faulted the reefs. 

Besides the saddle-reefs, " spurs " are a feature of the Bendigo field, 
and have yielded large quantities of gold. 

There are no less than 53 shafts over 2,000 feet deep on the field, and 
several exceed 4,000 feet in depth, the deepest being the Victoria Quartz 
shaft, which is down 4.614 feet. 

Amongst the most successful mines at Bendigo are the Garden Gully 

United, which has paid £852,169 in dividends, and the South New Moon, 

which has distributed profits amounting to £492,000. The output from 
Bendigo for the year 1912 was 168,177 ozs. of gold. 

Castlemmne gold-field resembles Bendigo in that the lodes are chiefly 
saddle lodes, and there are also fault lodes occurrmg m Lower Ordovician 
rocks, which have been folded into anticlines and synclines. Fault or 
" blocky " lodes consist of laminated quartz up to several feet in thickness, 
with large masses of spurs and veins traceable for hundreds of feet, the spurs 
forming at times payable stockworks. 

Maryhorough gold-field occurs in folded Ordovician slates and sandstones, 
which have been traversed in every direction by dykes of porphjay, porphy- 
rite, and lamprophyi-e. The principal ore deposits are quartz lenses occurring 
on either wall of lamprophjrre dykes, and large lode channels with main 
veins and stockwork spurs adjacent to such dykes. 

Daylesford is an important gold-field, the conditions under which the gold 
occurs being very similar to those at Bailarat. The Ordovician slates and 
sandstones have been folded into anticlines and synclines, which are traversed 
by dykes and cut by faults. The Ajax group of lodes, which are the most 



Mining Fields op Australia. 427 

important, have formed in west-dipping faults, which intersect certain favor- 
able east-dipping beds, while " flat makes " between the faults have also 
proved rich gold producers. 

The Cornish group of lodes to the east of the Ajax line are also west- 
dipping fault lodes in a series of favorable east-dipping strata. 

In the Maldon gold-field there are lodes of the fault type similar to those 
of Ballarat, saddle-reefs like those of Bendigo, and quartz lodes directly 
associated with dykes analogous to those of Maryborough. The prevailing 
rocks are folded slates and sandstones of Ordovician age, which have been 
altered by contact with intrusive granite. The most important mines are the 
Beehive, the Union, and the South G-erman ; the latter is still giving good 
returns. 

Stawell and Lauriston are other examples of gold-fields characterised by 
the occurrence of saddle-reefs. At Berringa also saddle-reefs have been 
successfully worked, as well as fault lodes similar to those of Ballarat. 

St. Arnaud is another gold-field where deep quartz mining has been 
highly profitable. The Lord Nelson group of lodes is the most important ; 
they have a westerly dip and intersect Lower Ordovician strata having a 
nearly similar inclination. Up to December, 1912, the Lord Nelson mine 
paid £265,350 in dividends. 

Walhalla gold-field is situated in an area of highly folded and contorted 
slates and sandstones of Silurian age. Cohen's reef has been most success- 
fully worked in two mines known as the Long Tunnel, and Long Tunnel 
Extended. It is a true fissure lode, and is associated with a dyke of quartz- 
mica-diorite, which is sometimes on one side of it and sometimes on the 
other. The strike of the lode is N. 18° W., and it dips W. 18° S. at a high 
angle. It has been worked down to a depth of 3,375 feet, and has yielded 
1,475,625 ozs. of gold, and paid £2,378,290 iti dividezids. In width the lode 
varied from a thread up to 12 feet, and exceptionally up to 50 feet. 

Wood's Point gold-field is also within an area of folded Silurian slates 
and sandstones. The principal feature of the field is the occurrence of gold- 
bearing " flat reefs " or " floors " intersecting diorite dykes. These flat 
reefs vary in thickness up to 10 or 20 feet ; and in one mine, The Morning 
Star, thirteen distinct flat reefs have been worked to a depth of 400 feet 
(water level) for a yield of over £1,000,000. Other important mines of a 
similar character are the New Loch Fyne and the Al. The former has paid 
nearly £110,000 in dividends. 

At Bethanga, on the Upper Murray, and Cassilis, in East Gippsland, 
lodes containing auriferous sulphide ores occur. Those of the first-named 
field are highly arseni(;al and have proved very refractory ; the Cassilis ores 
are being successfully treated. 

; Alluvial Leads. — The denudation of the auriferous reefs has produced 
exten.sive alluvial deposits on all the gold-fields, and it was the shallower 
of these which \yere worked with such successful results in the early days 
of gold-mining. Sub.sequently the gold was traced into the deep UvmU, 
which are liver beds of Tertiary age, now covered by accumulations of clays 
and sands, and frequently by lava flows. In Victoria these ancient 
C 121 54 . '2 K 



428 Federal Handbook. 



auriferous valleys measure in the aggregate several hundred miles in length, 
and they trend in a northerl)^ and southerly direction from an old divide 
closely approximating in position to the existing Main Dividing Range 
The value of the gold won from the deep alluvial leads and their shallower 
tributaries is probably not less than £150,000,000. In the earlier and more 
prosperous years of gold mining the principal alluvial fields were Ballarat, 
Bendigo, Creswick, Castlemaine, Maryborough, Ararat, Stawell, Chiltern, 
Rutherglen, and Beech worth. In most of these centres the gold yields- 
were phenomenal, and many large nuggets were found. At the present time 
deep leads are being worked at Ararat, Beaufort (Fiery Creek), Poseidon, 
Chiltern, and Rutherglen, and new leads are still being systematically searched 
for by means of the drill. 

Of recent years alluvial deposits that would be unpayable by ordinary 
mining methods have been worked successfully in many localities by means- 
of dredges, and at the present time there are 26 of these at work in the 
immediate vicinity of Bright. 

Nuggets. — The occurrence of very large gold nuggets in positions close 
to the surface in alluvial ground, where, by reason of their great weight,, 
it seems unlikely that they could have been transported by running water, 
has given rise to much speculation as to their origin, and some years ago it 
was suggested that they may have been formed in situ, either wholly or in 
part, by the deposition of gold from aqueous solutions. The largest nugget 
ever found (" The Welcome Stranger," from the Black Lead, Moliagul) 
weighed 2,520 ozs. in its natural state, and contained 68 lbs. of quartz. It 
was covered by only a few inches of surface soil. 

The discovery of several large nuggets, one of which weighed 953 ozs., 
a few inches below the surface, at Poseidon, in December, 1906, and the 
subsequent unearthing of a number of others, at intervals, in the same lead, 
has enabled more careful observations to be made of the conditions under 
which they occur, and there now appears to be little doubt as to their source. 

Every nugget of gold found in the Poseidon lead was observed to lie in 
the immediate vicinity of an " indicator," which could be seen traversing 
the bed rock forming the floor of the lead. The indicators consist of thin 
beds of slate, which have been more or less replaced by laminated quartz, 
and which contain pyrites veins. Occasionally the pyrites has been oxidized, 
and the indicator then consists of ferruginous laminated quartz of a saccha- 
roidal structure. Samples of the indicators have been assayed and found to- 
contain no gold. The occurrence of similar indicators in the Ordovician 
rocks of Ballarat East, and the fact that where they are intersected by quartz, 
veins the latter are frequently found to contain massive slugs of gold, 
strongly suggests a similar origin for the luiggets obtained in the Poseidon 
alluvial lead. Most of these nuggets have a considerable quantity of vitreous- 
quartz attached to them, and it is believed that, in the process of denudation, 
they have been shed from quartz reefs at the intersection of the latter with 
the indicator. It is probable therefore that if the indicators were followed 
into the solid rock, other cross veins would be met with, and that undisturbed 
masses of gold would be found at the intersections, as is the case in Ballarat 
East. 



Mining Fields of Australia. 429 

Bituminous Coal. — There are three isolated areas of Jurassic Coal 
Measures in Victoria, two of which, viz., the Wannon River Watershed, and 
the Otway-Bellarine district, have not been proved to contain workable seams 
of coal. In South Gippslaud the measures occupy an area of 2,100 square 
miles, and a belt about 50 miles long by 10 miles wide, extending from 
Kilcunda to Morwell, has been proved to contain some payable seams. 
Mining is now being carried on at Kilcunda, Wonthaggi, Outtrim, Jumbunna, 
and Korumburra, but the coal seams, with the exception of those at 
Wonthaggi, rarely exceed 3 feet in thickness. 

At the Wonthaggi State Coal Mines the seam reaches a thickness of 
7 ft. 8 in., with two shale bands varying from a quarter of an inch to 1 inch 
in thickness. The seam has been much faulted, and this adds considerably 
to the cost of winning. The coal is of good quality, but is friable, and there- 
fore produces a considerable proportion of " smalls." The average com- 
position of the coal is as follows : — 

Hygroscopic Moisture .. .. .. 4*93 

Volatile Hydrocarbons . . . . 34 '32 

Fixed Carbon .. .. .. 51*43 

Ash .. .. .. .. 9-32 



100-00 



Calorific value .. .. .. 11*97 

The total annual output of coal is at present about 600,000 tons, of which 
the State Mine produces 456,000 tons. 

Broivri Coal. — There are three main deposits of Brown Coal of Tertiary 
age in Victoria, viz. : — 

1. Morwell area, of about 800 square miles. 

2. Alberton area, of about 200 square miles. 

3- Altona Bay area, extending from Melbourne to Werribee, containing 
700 square miles. 

The deposits are the thickest in the world ; one bore at Morwell passed 
through 780 feet of brown coal in a depth of 1,010 feet ; the three largest 
beds being 266, 227, and 166 feet thick respectively. The composition of the 
Morwell coal is as follows : — • 

Water .. .. .. .. 35*08 

Volatile Matter . . . . 29*24 

Fixed Carbon .. . . . . 33*28 

Ash .. .. .. .. 2*40 



100*00 



Calorific value .. .. .. 8*53 

There is every reason to believe that practical use will be made of this 
fiifl in the future. 

2E2 



430 Federal Handbook. 



Tin. — Tertiary leads containing stream tin have been worked at Beech.- 
■worth, Eldorado, the Upper Murray, Toora, and the Latrobe Valley, but the 
workings have not been very extensive. At Toora, in South Gippsland, 
the deposit of gravels and clays, containing a little tin and gold, is about 
150 feet in thickness and extends for about a mile and a half in length. It 
occupies an old river valley in the Jurassic rocks and has evidently been 
carried a long distance. A very complete hydraulic plant, which cost £20,000, 
has recently been erected and is now treating the gravels ; the question as 
to their commeicial value will therefore soon be settled. 

In the North-Eastern district, around Tallandoon and Eskdale, lodes, 
pegmatite dykes, and greisens carrying tin-ore occur, but there has been very 
little mining there. 

Copper. — At the Thomson Kiver, near Walhalla, the Silurian rocks 
have been intruded by a hornblendic dyke 60 feet wide, and through a width 
of 20 feet of this rock copper sulphides, containing platinum and palladium, 
are disseminated. The chute of ore has been proved for a length of about 
70 feet. Although essentially a concentrating ore, it has hitherto been smelted 
as it came from the mine, and 1,290 tons yielded 3 per cent, of copper and 
18 grains of platinum per unit of Cu. 

To the west of the ore-body an enriched vein of sulphides is said to have 
yielded from 10 to 13 per cent, of copper for a length of 120 feet by a depth 
of 40. 

Antimony. — Sulphide and oxide of antimony occur in quartz veins in 
dykes in the Silurian rocks and occasionally in the Ordovician. At Coster- 
field a considerable quantity of antimony has been won, and at present 
about 55 tons of sulphide concentrates containing 2j ozs. of gold per ton are 
being exported weekly. 

Bismuth occurs in small quantities at Redbank, Lintons, Wombat Creek, 
and Maldon. 

Molybdenite is also found in small quantities, the best deposit being at 
Wangarabell, in East Clippsland. 

Wolfram and Scheelite occur in lodes in Ordovician strata at Linton 
and Chiltern, and in granite at Mount Murphy. The deposits, however, 
appear to be of small extent. 

Gypsum has been extensively worked in Tertiary deposits at Boort and 
Lake Boga. At Kow Plains, in the Mallee District, deposits of earthy gypsum 
occur over an area of about 100 square miles. The mineral contains about 
94 per cent, of calcic sulphate, CaS04 -f- 2OH2. It occupies ridges about 
20 feet high, and also extends to a depth of about 3 feet below the 
intervening plains. These deposits are probably the most extensive in 
Australia. 

Diatomaceous Earth is found in deposits of Tertiary age in many localities, 
the most notable being Lillicur, near Talbot, where extensive deposits are 
now being worked. 



Mining Fields of Australia. 



431 



Table showing the Quantity and Value of Minerals won during 
THE Year 1912 and to the end of 1912. 

Victoria. 





Production for Year 

ending 31st December, 

1912. 


Total rroduction to 31st 
December, 1912. 


Name of Metal or Mineral. 












Quantity 
raised. 


Value. 


Quantity. 


Value. 




fine ozs. 


£ 


fine ozs. 


£ 


Gold 


480,131 


2,039,464 


68,672,868 


291,703,453 


Silver 


1 17,424* 

1 


2,200 


1,360.2.52* 
30,058 


206,359 
7,816 


Platinum 


tons. 




184 
tons. 


989 


Coal 


589,143 


258,455 


4,667,054 


2,436,017 


Brown Coal 


4,012 


866 


73,185 


26,374 


Copper and Copper Ore 






18,694 


215,761 


Tin Ore . . 


48 


5,733 


15,715 


782,680 


Antimony Ore 


2,430 


16,162 


37,896 


240,874 


Silver-lead Ore 






793 


5,760 


Iron Ore 






5,434 


12,540 


Wolfram 


"lO 


"574 


65 


5,«59 


Diamonds 




20 




128 


Sapphires, etc. 








630 


Gypsum . . 


2,078 


3,359 


21,198 


14,473 


Magnesite 


211 


633 


383 


1,143 


Kaolin 


288 


342 


5,535 


11,366 


Diatomaceous Earth 


850 


3,400 


4,743 


19,352 


Manganese Ore 


20 


60 


45 


212 


Building Stones (Basalt, Sandstone, 










Granite, Slate, Flagstone, Lime- 










stone (for making Ume), also Crude 










Salt) .. 








3,996,423t 


Pigment Clays 


13 


" 26 


" 81 


106 


Totals 




2,331,294 


299,688,115 



* Extracted from gold at Melbourne Mint. 

t These returns are from 1866 only, and are collected by the Government Statist. The value of building 
stones (including crude salt) raised during 1911 was £151,713 — total to end of 1911 only, the figiu-es for 
1912 not being yet available. 

3. Queensland. 

The potential wealth of Queensland is remarkable, by reason of the 
extent and diversity of the mineral deposits already discovered ; the mining 
industry is in a healthy condition to-day, and vast areas of the State still 
remain practically unprospected. 

The Coal-fields of Queensland are of great extent, and are of three ages, 
viz., Permo-Carboniferous, Trias-Jura, and Cretaceous. The first-named will 
probably prove to be the most important in the future, as the coal they con- 
tain is of the best quality, and the seams are of greater thickness and uni- 
formity than those of the fields of more recent age ; hitherto, however, 
they have been the least developed. They extend for a length of about 
350 miles in a northerly direction from near the Southern railway across the 
Central line to within 60 miles of Bowen, and other isolated areas occur at 
Blair Athol, near Clermont, and at Mount Mulligan, about 50 miles west of 



432 Federal Handbook. 



Cairns. The Blair Atliol field is a very remarkable one, for though only 
2^ miles long by 1| wide, as at present known, it contains, at a depth of about 
120 feet from the surface, a seam of good hard steam coal, 66 feet thick, 
and without bands. 

It has been estimated by Mr. Dunstan, Government Geologist, that the 
Permo-Carboniferous seams probably contain 1,000,000,000 tons of coal. 

The Trias-Jura coal-fields are of special interest because the greater 
proportion of the coal hitherto produced in Queensland has been obtained 
from them, particularly from the neighbourhood of Ipswich, where coal- 
mining has been carried on for over 50 years. The area of the productive 
Trias-Jura Coal Measures is approximately 70 square miles, chiefly in the 
south-eastern quadrant of Queensland, and it has been estimated that they 
probably contain 470,000,000 tons of coal. 

The Cretaceous Coal Measures cover a wide area in the centre of Queens- 
land, where they contain supplies of artesian water, and where their coal 
seams have not yet been proved productive. An easterly development, 
however, of these measures occurs at Burrum, near Maryborough, where 
collieries have been working for 30 years. The productive area of the 
Burrum coal-field is about 6 square miles, and it has been estimated to contain 
approximately 104,000,000 tons of coal. 

In the aggregate, the Queensland coal-fields which are known to be pro- 
ductive probably contain about 1,574,000,000 tons of coal, in seams over 
1 foot in thickness. 

Gold is very widely distributed throughout Queensland, and many isolated 
gold-fields have been worked since the precious metal was first discovered 
in 1852. 

Gympie Gold-field is situated about 100 miles north of Brisbane. Alluvial 
gold was first discovered here in 1867, and the first auriferous reef was found 
in the same year. The total yield of gold from this field up to the end of the 
year 1912 was £11,270,466." 

The rocks in which the auriferous reefs occur have been named by the 
Queensland Geological Survey the " Middle Gympie Series," and are of 
Permo-Carboniferous age, as determined by numerous marine fossils found 
in them. These beds consist of limestones, shales or slates, conglomerates, 
tufis, and interbedded diabases and greenstones. At least seven distinct 
beds of black graphitic or anthracitic slate occur in these rocks, and have 
a very marked influence on the gold contents of the reefs intersecting them. 
In thickness these graphitic beds vary from a mere thread up to 200 feet. 
The beds have a general dip to the east at an angle of about 25 degrees, 
while the inclination of the reefs is generally to the westward at an angle of 
about 60 degrees. A distinctive feature of the field is that payable gold 
values are only found when the reefs have a westerly dip, and where they 
intersect black or graphitic slates, dipping in the opposite direction. Occasion- 
ally a bed of graphitic slate is found to merge into grey or purple mangani- 
ferous slate, and where this happens the intersecting reefs are almost invariably 
found to be barren. Furthermore, where a reef is afiected by a normal fault 
within the limits of a bed of graphitic slate, an enrichment of the reef is 
produced, but in the case of a reversed fault the reef is found to be barren. 



Mining Fields of Australia. 433 

The reefs vaiy in thickness from a thread to 20 feet. Some exceptionally 
rich yields of gold have been obtained, and in one instance one of the monthly 
dividends of a mining company amounted to £68,000, a sum equivalent to 
its nominal capital. At the present time the field is in a somewhat depressed 
condition, and its future prosperity appears to depend upon the success of 
attempts now in progress to test the third or lowest graphitic slate bed 
recently found to extend to the east at considerable depths below the Monk- 
land slates. 

Charters Towers is a small but very rich gold-field situated on the Northern 
railway line 82 miles south-west of Townsville. The oldest rocks on the 
field are schists, slates, and quartzites, which have been intruded and meta- 
morphosed by granite. Later dykes of felsite and diorite have intersected 
the granite and sedimentary rocks. The gold, associated with galena, 
pyrites, and some blende, occurs in quartz reefs, which are found chiefly in 
the granite, and almost invariably in proximity to igneous dykes. The 
principal lines of reef are the Day Dawn, Brilliant, St. George, and Queen's, 
which all have an east and west strike with a northerly dip. They vary 
considerably in width, occasionally widening to as much as 50 feet. Over 
£27,000,000 worth of gold has been won at Charters Towers since 1872, and 
although the field has not been in a very flourishing state for some time, 
the geological features connected with the occurrence of the gold point to the 
probability of a renewed prosperity. 

Mount Morgan, 25 miles south-west of Rockhampton, was discovered 
in 1882. It is unquestionably the most remarkable gold and copper mine 
in Australia. An area of 1 square mile was purchased from a selector for 
£640, and a company, with a capital of £1,000,000, was subsequently formed 
to work it for gold. The upper portion of the deposit, consisting principally 
of limonite, was enormously rich in fine gold. Though the metal was seldom 
visible in the ironstone, much of the latter contained from 30 to 40 ozs. of 
gold per ton, and in one year the Company paid a million sterling in dividends. 
The total amount hitherto paid to the shareholders is nearly nine millions. 

The geological foundation upon which this extraordinary deposit was 
formed consisted of a series of limestones, and banded claystones and tuffs, 
with sills and dykes of quartz porphyry. Subsequently this stratified series, 
which is probably of Carboniferous age, was intruded by hornblendic granite, 
and still later by andesitic dolerite dykes of at least two ages. It is probable 
that the intrusion of the hornblendic granite was the cause of (1) the meta- 
. morphism of the sedimentary series ; and (2) the impregnation of these 
rocks with iron pyrites containing small proportions of gold and copper. 
The later intrusions of the dolerite dykes, of which there is a complete net- 
work, probably completed the alteration (silification) of the ore bodies, which 
in the lowest levels, consist of massive quartzite impregnated with low-grade 
copper and gold bearing pyrites. The invasion of the dolerites was probably 
also responsible for vigorous solfataric action, which had the effect of concen- 
trating on the top of the deposit pyrites containing high proportions of gold 
and copper. Subsequently atmospheric agencies caused the decomposition 
of the pyrites, the bulk of the gold being left in extremely rich limonite ore, 
while the copper was leached and redeposited between the 300 and 650 ft. 
levels. Below the latter depth the ore becomes gradually poorer. 



434 Federal Handbook. 



The gold in tlie limonite was extremely pure, being worth £4 4s. 8d. per 
ounce. 

The Mount Morgan ore body is approximately wedge-shaped, its dimen- 
sions being about 1,200 feet in length by 500 in width, and it is believed to 
thin out at a depth of about 1,100 feet. 

An extremely good fire-brick is made from a bed of shale, 30 feet 
thick, found in the Trias-Jura rocks in the vicinity of Mount Morgan. 

Amongst other gold-fields which have been worked with greater or less 
success are Clermont, Croydon, Coen, Etheridge, Eidsvold, Calliope, Hamilton, 
Palmer, Ravenswood, and Starke. 

Copper. — Undoubtedly the most important copper producing territory 
in Australia is the Cloncurry Field, which consists of an area of primary 
rocks (probably Silurian) about 200 miles in length by 100 in width. Clon- 
curry is situated 480 miles west of Townsville, with which it is connected by 
rail, and about 220 miles south of the G-ulf of Carpentaria. 

The prevailing rocks are schists, quartzites, indurated slates, marmorized 
limestones and calcareous tufT?, with intrusive granites, porphyries, diorites„ 
etc. 

A notable feature of the district is the occm^rence, along the tops of ridges, 
of lenticular masses of hematite. 

Although comparatively little prospecting has yet been done, quite a 
number of deposits of extremely rich copper ore has been opened, and some 
of these have been developed into very important mines. Generally speaking, 
the ore deposits occur as interstratified lenses and bunches, sometimes of very 
large dimensions, and a small proportion of gold is frequently associated with 
the copper. The field has unquestionably a great future before it as a copper- 
producing area. Amongst the most important mines of the Cloncurry 
Field are Mount Oxide, Mount Cuthbert, Mount Elliott, The Hampden, The 
Duchess, and the Great Australia. 

The Great Fitzroy is an important copper mine situated 10 miles north 
of Rockhampton ; other notable deposits occur at Mount Perry, and at 
Peak Downs, near Clermont. 

Tin mining was commenced at Stanthorpe, near the southern border of 
Queensland, in 1872, and for a period of about eleven years afterwards 
large quantities of tin-stone were recovered from the granite of that district. 
Thereafter the production gradually decreased, though tin mining is still 
carried on — principally by means of dredges. 

The Herberton District, in Northern Queensland, is the prin-^ipal tin- 
producing field of the State at the present time, other important tin-bearing 
localities being Annan, Kangaroo Hills, FossUbrook, and Stanhills, near 
Croydon. 

The Herberton and Chillagoe Districts constitute an important mineral 
field, and contain deposits of tin, copper, silver-lead, wolfram, bismuth, 
molybdenite, antimony, gold, monazite, and coal. The country is very 
mountainous its altitude varying from 1,000 to 4,000 feet above sea-leveL 
It is situated to the west of Cairns, with which it is connected by railway 



Mining Fields of Australia. 435 

The oldest rocks about Herberton are tuffaceous sandstones and shales, 
probably of Carboniferous age, which have been intruded and highly meta- 
morphosed by granites and quartz-porphyries, while both the latter and the 
sedimentary series have been intruded by later dykes of diorite, andesite, and 
elvan. The alteration of the sandstones and shales near Herberton and 
Irvinebank has been so complete that little or no trace of their original bedding 
can be distinguished, though at Stannary Hills fine contorted sections can 
be seen in the banks of Eureka Creek. 

The ore deposits occur both in the sedimentary and in the intrusive 
rocks, but generally within a short distance of the boundary between the 
two. True fissure lodes are of comparatively rare occurrence in this field, 
the ore bodies consisting for the most part of pipes, bunches (chutes) or 
impregnation?. 

Near the town of Herberton large quantities of stream tin were obtained 
over 30 years ago from an alluvial lead which was traced down under basalt 
and which is still being worked. Subsequently quite a number of ore deposits 
was found in the quartz-porphyry near the alluvial lead, and these developed 
into most irregularly shaped chutes or bimches, some of which were extremely 
rich. They are of all sizes, but rarely exceed 100 feet in length by 15 feet in 
width, while they have occasionally been worked to a depth of about 700 feet. 
The most important of these deposits at present being worked is " The Eain- 
bow," which is of considerable size, and is yielding siliceous ore containing 
15 per cent, of black tin. 

At Watsonville, 6 miles to the west similar ore bodies occur in sandstones 
(quartzites) and shales near the junction with granite, where the tin is fre- 
quently associated with copper ores. 

The Irvinebank Mining Company has a large crushing and tin-smelting 
plant, 18 miles from Herberton, which is served by a number of mines within 
an area of sedimentary rocks. The most important mine near Irvinebank 
is the Vulcan, which has a vertical shaft 1,460 feet deep. A series of discon- 
nected, but in many cases overlapping, bunches of tin-ore of great size and 
irregular form, have been worked down to a depth of 1,050 feet, and there 
are indications that deposits occur below that level. This mine has had a 
most successful history and its future prospects appear to be excellent. 

To the south of Irvinebank there are numerous deposits of tin around 
Spring Hills, Smith's Creek, etc., in sedimentary rocks, while at Mount Garnet 
about £360,000 worth of copper was obtained from ore-bodies in granite ; 
however, in the lower levels of this mine the ore became zinciferous and iron 
pyrites replaced the copper ore. 

A few miles to the west of Irvinebank the Victoria silver-lead lode, up to 
5 feet in thickness, is being worked at a depth of 200 feet, while at Montalbion 
the same class of ore occurs in irregular bunches in sedimentary rocks. 

At Stannary Hills both tin and silver-lead are found in the sandstones 
near their junction with intrusive quartz-porphyry. The tin-ore occurs in 
a chlorite gangue in irregularly-shaped bunches having the same character 
as those in the Vulcan Mine, and has been worked to a depth of about 700 
feet. 



436 Federal Handbook. 



About 18 miles west of Stannary Hills deposits of wolfram, bismuth, 
and molybdenite are worked at Bamford Hill, near Petford, and 10 miles 
south-west of the latter place a considerable area of sedimentary rocks con- 
taining tin and wolfram occurs near Koorboora. Many of these deposits 
are being worked in a small way. Seven miles further west, in Torpy's 
Crooked Creek Mine, an irregularly-shaped pipe of sliver-lead ore is being 
worked. 

At Chillagoe, which is connected by private railway (92 miles long) with 
the Government line at Mareeba, extensive copper and lead smelting works 
were erected to treat the products of the district, but although the copper 
lodes in the vicinity were exceedingly promising on the surface they failed 
to carry their values to a depth, and most of the Chillagoe Company's Mines 
have now been closed down, the works being kept going by other mines in 
the district. 

At Mungana, 10 miles from Chillagoe, some very interesting silver-lead 
deposits occur in the Girofla and Lady Jane Mines. The ore occurs in caverns 
in limestone rock close to its jimction with granite. Some of these ore-bodies 
are of great magnitude, in one instance as much as 140 feet long by 40 feet 
wide, and over 30*^ feet in depth. In the Girofla Mine, considerable quantities 
of oxidized lead and copper ores were found underneath galena and copper 
pyrites. This unusual occm-rence was probably due to the surface waters 
having found their way below the sulphides through one of the side channels 
which are so numerous in limestone caves 

As the contact between the granite and the limestone has been traced 
for a distance of many miles, it is probable that numerous other deposits of 
a similar character will be found. 

About 23 miles westerly from Mungana, in the Klondyke District, a smelt • 
ing plant has been erected by the Mammoth Company to treat the copper 
ores from their mines. These ores also contain an appreciable proportion 
of gold. 

Wolfram Camp is situated about 14 miles north-west from Dimbulah, 
a station on the Chillagoe Railway. Wolfram, molybdenite, and bismuth 
are extensively mined here in intrusive greisen close to its junction with slates. 
The ores occur in bunches and strings in very irregularly-shaped chutes or 
pipes, similar in their mode of occurrence to the tin-bearing deposits of 
Herberton. The general trend of the wolfram chutes, however, is northerly 
and they have occasionally been followed on their dip for as much as 600 
feet in that direction. The ores are invariably found in a quartz gangue. 
The Irvinebank Mining Co. has erected a compact plant at Wolfram Camp 
for the treatment of these ores. The molybdenite is separated from the 
wolfram and bismuth by jigs and concentrators, and is finally recovered 
from the tailings by the flotation process. 

From Northcote, 14 miles west of Mareeba, for a distance of about 50 miles 
in a north-westerly direction, occurs a belt of slates and sandstones con- 
taining antimony and gold deposits. Both metals occur in quartz reefs, 
some of which are interbedded, while some intersect the strata. Some of 
these reefs contain gold only, in others nearly pure stibnite is found, whilst 
in others again gold is associated with the antimony ore. The antimony 



Mining Fields of Australia. 437 



lodes are worked intermittently, the industry being; influenced by the market 
price of the metal. The sedimentary rocks of this district are traversed by 
immense dykes which have been much altered by secondary silica. 

The wolfram deposits of Mount Carbine are situated about 22 miles 
west of Mount Molloy railway station. They occm- in dykes of coarse pegma- 
tite which have intruded highly altered blue slates near their junction with 
a, granite massif. 

The pegmatite dykes vary in width from an inch up to 8 feet and they 
■occur in more or less parallel series, though adjoining dykes are frequently 
connected by smaller ones running in every conceivable direction. The 
result is a complete network of ore-bodies in which the wolfram is distributed 
in an average proportion of about 1 '3 per cent. The deposits are being 
worked by tunnels several hundred feet below the top of the mountain, and 
it seems probable that they will be found to increase in width as greater depth 
is attained. A large dyke of felsite crosses the mountain near its summit, 
-and intersects the pegmatite series which is evidently older than it. 

A very complete crushing and concentrating plant, containing twenty 
head of stamps, is employed in treating the ore from these mines, which are 
mainly the property of the Irvinebank Mining Company. 

The granite mountains on both sides of Mount Carbine are stanniferous, 
and on the northern side considerable deposits of alluvial tin-ore are being 
worked, at intervals, nearly as far as Cooktown. 

It may be stated that from 1,000 to 1,500 men are making a living by 
working alluvial tin within the Herberton, Chillagoe, and Cooktown districts. 

The principal difficulty connected with mining in these fields is the scarcity 
of timber for fuel, which at some of the principal centres costs as much as 
23s. per cord. The recent discovery of coal seams at Mount Mulligan, which 
is only 30 miles north of Dimbulah, a station on the Chillagoe railway, is 
therefore of immense importance to the mining industry. A railway is now 
being constructed to the coal-field, and it is safe to say that the cost of fuel 
at the mines will shortly be reduced by 50 per cent. 

Texas. — Near the town of Texas on the southern border of Queensland 
an important silver-lead mine, called the Silver Spur, has been successfully 
worked for many years. The ore consists of argentiferous galena with zinc- 
blende and a little copper pyrites, and it occurs in extensive lenses in Permo- 
Carboniferous rocks. 

Precious Opal is found in Upper Cretaceous rocks in the western districts 
of Queensland. The most important opal workings are at Paroo, Kyabra, 
and Koroit. Other localities where the gem has been found include Duck 
Creek, Bull Creek, Sheep Station Creek, Yowah, and Kynuna. 

Sapphire Mining is practised to a considerable extent in the Anakie 
District about 20^ miles west of Kockhampton. The gemstones, which are 
blue, green, or yellow in colour, occur in a Post-Tertiary alluvial lead, 
associated wath water-worn boulders of basalt, granite, and sandstone. The 
lead has been traced for a distance of about 27 miles. The original matrix 
of the sapphires is doubtless the basalt which occurs near the source of the 
alluvial deposit, and the gems have been set free by the weathering of the 
rock. 



438 



Federal Handbook. 



Table showing the Quantity and Value op Minerals Won during the 
Year 1912, and to the End of 1912. 

Queensland. 





Production for Year Ending 


Total Production to 31st December 




31st Decembe 


r, 1912. 


1912. 




MineraL 












Quantity. 


Value. 


Quantity. 


Value. 


Coal . . . . 902,166 tons 


£ 
338,264 


14,1.54,049 tons 


£ 

5,377,240- 


Gold 


347,946 ozs. 
fine 


1,477,979 


17,707,939 ozs. 
fine 


75,218,494 


Silver 


569,181 ozs. 


66,188 


13,497,125 ozs. 


1,722.319 


Copper 


23,120 tons 


1,698,280 


196,163 tons 


10,948,399^ 


Tin .. 


3,230 „ 


364,503 


134,593 „ 


8,199,391 


Lead 


3,108 „ 


55,667 


39,093 „ 


534,504 


Antimony 






4,181 „ 


50.953. 


Opal 


. . i 


3,000 




172,195 


Wolfram 


. . 1 626 tons 


57,821 


8,350 „ 


735,665 


Manganese 


.. 1 308 „ 


1,281 


17,004 „ 


64,589 


Bismuth 


197 „ 


19,261 


696 „ 


111,08^ 


Molybdenite . 


102 „ 


17,349 


1,415 „ 


153,70a 


Limestone 


97,175 „ 


24,176 


869,867 „ 


279,427 


Gems 






40,016 




226,302 


Ironstone 




15,526 tons 


9,035 


259,801 tons 


202,780 


ScheeHte 








20 „ 


1,772 


Fireclay 




6,336 „ 


2,535 


23,491 „ 


9,63a 


Graphite 








148 „ 


732. 


Totals . 


• 




4,175,355 




104,009,087 



4. Tasmania. 



The West Coast. 

The West Coast of Tasmania consists of very mountainous country 
composed of Silm'ian and Pre-Silurian sediments, with granites and other 
intrusive rocks. The granites are probably mainly responsible for the 
mineralization which has of late years resulted in the development of a number 
of important mining fields within this area. 

Waratah Mining Field. — The oldest and most important of these fields 
is that of Waratah, where the Mount Bischoff tin mine has had a 
most successful history dm-ing the last 40 years. Mount Bischoi! is 
formed of Silurian slates and sandstones, which have been intruded 
by a dyke of topaz-porphyry varying in width from 6 to 150 feet. 
The general course of the dyke is about north-west and south-east, 
but near the top of the mountain it makes a complete horseshoft 
bend. The porphyry contains about '3 per cent, of tin-oxide, and the 
slates and sandstones, which have been altered by contact metamorphism, 
also contain, within a distance of about 60 feet of the dyke, small veins and 
impregnations of tin-ore. The denudation of the dyke during past ages 
resulted in the formation of a vast talus of detrital material, which in the early 
years of the mine's history yielded almost fabulous retm-ns of tin. At the 



Mining Fields of Australia. 439 

present time the dyke, the adjacent sediments, and the detrital material are 
all being removed by open-cast workings in a series of benches, and are 
sent to the mill in conjunction for an average yield of '5 per cent, of tin- 
oxide. There is also a lode known as the Queen lode, which is being worked 
underground. It intersects both the slates and the dyke, has an average 
width of 3 ft. 6 in., and yields about "75 per cent, of tin-oxide. This lude- 
stufi is also treated with the material from the open cut. From a commercial 
point of view the mine has a unique history. The company was floated 
in 1873, the capital actually paid up amounting to only £7,600. In the 
40 years which have since elapsed the shareholders have loceived upwards 
of £2,400,000 in dividends. At present the total cost of mining, conveying, 
and milling amounts to only 4s. lid. per ton of ore. The plant is driven 
by hydro-electric power, the water having a hydrostatic head of .560 feet. 

The Mount Bischofi Extended mine adjoins the Mount Bischofi, and 
contains a lode averaging about 3 feet in width and yielding '94 per cent, 
of metallic tin. The workings extend for a vertical depth of 750 feet, and 
nearly 20,000 tons of ore are treated annually in a ten-head mill. 

The Magnet Silver-Lead mine is situated about 5 miles west of Mount 
BischoS. The lode channel, which occurs in dolomite, varies in width from 
6 to 100 feet. The lode exhibits a banded structure with veins and lenses of 
silver-lead-zinc sulphides, with occasionally a little jamesonite and ruby 
silver ore. The lode channel has been worked for a length of about 400 feet. 
The mill is worked by water power, a hydrostatic head of 450 feet being 
available. The concentrates contain 100 ounces of silver, 50 per cent, of 
lead, and 11 per cent, of zinc. 

The Mount Cleveland Tin mine is situated 10 miles from Mount Bischofi, 
on the Whyte Eiver. A lode of considerable width and said to yield '9 per 
cent, of tin oxide has been worked by an open cut, and has been proved at 
a lower level to consist of pyritic ore. 

Osmiridiiim Mining. — Alluvial deposits of osmiridium are worked in the 
Mneteen-mile Creek and other tributaries of the Savage River, near Bald 
Hill, to the north-west of Mount Bischofi. The metal occm-s in grains and 
small nuggets in the crevices of the rocks farming the creek beds. The 
largest piece yet discovered weighs about 2 ounces. The source of the metal 
has been proved to be serpentine rock, in which it appears to be sparsely 
disseminated in gi-ains. 

The Tullah Field is situated about 15 miles south of Waratah, and the 
principal mine is the North Mount Farrell Silver-lead Mine. There are three 
lodes varying from 5 to 20 feet in width in the prop(>rty, and they occur in 
crushed schist near its junction with intrusive porphyry. The ore consists 
of argentiferous galena with only a trace of zinc-blende. The output is 
about 2,700 tons per annum of picked ore and concentrates, the former 
containing 63 per cent, of lead and 75 ounces of silver per ton, while the 
latter average 53 per cent, of lead and 55 ounces of silver. 

In the Rosebery Field, near the town of Rosebery, on the Burnie-Zeehan 
railway, there are three important mines, viz., the Tasmaniaii Copper Com- 
pany, the Primrose, and the Horculos. The Tasmaniaii Copper Company 
as a misnomer, as thev work a silv(u-h'a(l-ziiic niim;. Th(( couiitrv rock is a 



440 Federal Handbook. 



silicious schist and tlie ore-deposits consist of large interbedded lenses of 
fine-grained pyritic ore with galena, zinc-blende, and a little fahlerz. The 
lenses extend for a length of 2,500 feet with a maximum width of 60 feet. 
Over 30,000 tons of ore have already been extracted, the average contents 
being 25 per cent, of zinc, 7*96 per cent, of lead, 12*3 ounces of silver, and 
•145 oimces of gold per ton. The developed and blocked-out ore reserves 
have been estimated at 227,300 tons, and the probable ore reserves at 
773,000 tons. 

The Primrose is an adjoining mine containing deposits of similar ore, and 
the two mines are worked, under the one management, by means of tunnels 
and open cuts. 

The Hercules Mine is situated at an altitude of 2,800 feet on the slopes 
of Mount Read, about 4| miles from Rosebery. It contains three large^ 
lenses of sulphide ore of similar character to that of the Tasmanian Copper 
Company's Mine, the average composition being 28 per cent, of zinc, 8 per 
cent, of lead, 8 ounces of silver, and '16 ormces of gold per ton, while the 
most eastern lens also contains a fair proportion of copper. The probable 
ore reserves in the Hercules Mine have been estimated at about 500,000 tons. 
The futm'C success of those niines appears to depend upon the adoption of a 
method of treatment which will enable the zinc to be recovered in addition 
to the other metals. 

The Renison Bell Field contains a number of tin mines, of which the most 
important are the Renison Bell, Boulder, Central, Penzance, Dreadnought, 
and Federal. They are situated near the Renison Bell Station, on the Emu 
Bay Railway. The principal rocks in this locality consist of slates, tufEs, 
and intrusive quartz-porphyry. The ore-bodies are composed chiefly of 
pyrrohotite and iron pyrites carrying cassiterite, and they have been deposited 
by ascending solutions and vapours along faults which have fissured the 
country rock in a very irregular manner, causing the lodes to exhibit many 
branches and flat floors. The slates in the vicinity of the lodes have also been 
impregnated by veinlets of tin-bearing pyrites. The gangue of the ore 
bodies consists chiefly of quartz and dolomite. Rich pockets and bands of 
tin ore are occasionally found in the lodes. The oxidation of the sulphide 
ores has resulted in the formation of rich stanniferous gossan at the sm'face, 
and large quantities of this have been profitably treated. There was also a 
considerable accumulation of detrital ore on the sides of the hills, and from 
this the tin was recovered by sluicing. The mill at the Renison Bell Mine 
contains only ten head of stamps, and the ore at present being treated has an 
average yield of *9 per cent, of tin oxide. 

The Zeehan Field. — 'The town of Zeehan is the principal settlement on the 
West Coast, and possesses important smelting works, besides being the centre 
of a group of mines. The principal properties in this district are the Zeehan- 
Montana, Cuni, Silver Queen, British Zeehan, Silver King, and Oonah, but 
at the present time only the two first-named are being worked. At the 
Zeehan- Montana Mine Sihu'ian slates and tuiis form the country rocks, and 
with these are associated intrusive dykes of stilite. The ore bodies are in the 
form of north and south fissure lodes, the filling of which is principally com- 
posed of siderite with galena, zinc-blende, and pyrites. A series of fault 



Mining Fields of Australia. 441 



fissures, locally called slides, with a general north-west and south-east strike, 
have intersected and displaced the lodes. As the siderite lodes approach 
the south-western or footwall sides of the slides, they are split up into 
branches which frequently, contain chutes of argentiferous galena. The con- 
tinuation of the lode beyond the hanging wall of the slide is usually barren 
until it approaches the footwall of another slide, when similar deposits of 
galena are met with. The shaft has been sunk to a depth of 800 feet, but so 
far practically no payable ore has been found below the 500-ft. level. The 
mine has peid about £180,000 in dividends since 1893. 

The Cuni Mine is situated 5 miles fi-om Zeehan on the railway to Eenison 
Bell. The country consists of alterations of ferruginous slate and serpentine. 
Lenses of pyrrhotite occm" in the serpentine, and the ore contains about 5 per 
cent, of copper and 12 per cent, of nickel. The lenses attain a maximum 
width of 14 feet, and are sometimes 100 feet long. This mine and a similar 
one adjoining it are at present in the prospecting stage. The ore has been 
proved at intervals over a distance of about 1 mile. 

The Mount Lyell Fiehl.—The Mount Lyell Mining and Eailway Company's 
property is situated near Queenstown, about 15 miles fi'om Strahan. The 
principal mines owned by the company are the Mount Lyell, North Mount 
Lyell, Comstock, South Mount Lyell, and Lyell Tharsis. 

The Mount Lyell ore deposits consists of a huge lens of low-grade pyritic 
ore of the following composition : — 

Sulphur . . . . . . . . 42 per cent. 



L:on 

Silica . . 
Alumina 

Barium sulphate 
Copper 
Silver .. 
Gold . . 



36 

5 „ 

2-8 „ 

4-1 „ 

0-4 „ 

1 '86 oz. per ton 

•04 



The ore-body occm's in tufiaceous schists close to theii- junction with con- 
glomerate. It is probable that it has been deposited fi-om ascending solutions- 
in a cavity or fissure formed by a fault, and there is evidence, especially on 
the hanging wall, of its having been enlarged by replacement of the schists. 
The lens has been worked by an open cut to a depth of 470 feet, and by 
shafts and levels to a further depth of 350 feet, while bores have proved t^at 
it extends to a total depth of 850 feet. 

The present ore reserves are estimated at two million tons. The ore is 
smelted in conjimction with the North Mount Lyell ore in the proportion of 
2 tons of the former to 1 of the latter. 

The South Mount Lyell Mine contains a pyritic ore-body similar to Mount 
Lyell, and containing '38 per cent, of copper. It is estimated to contain 
about 300,000 tons, but has only been opened up on one level at present. 

The North Mount Lyell Mine is situated about 1 mile from the Mount 
Lyell. The ore-body is an irregular lens of large dimensions, bounded by 
conglomerate, and it has the appearance of having resulted from the meta- 
somatic replacement of schist. The ore is .silicious, and contains bunches 



442 



Federal Handbook. 



Its composition is as 



6 per cent. 
65-70 

7-7 

6 
10-2 

1 

1'15 oz. per ton. 
A trace 
1,100 feet, and has been 

1,000,000 tons. The ore 



and impregnations of bornite and chalcopyrite. 
follows : — ■ 

Copper 

Silica . . 

Iron 

Sulphur 

Alumina 

Barium sulphate 

Silver . . 

Gold . . 
The lens has already been proved to a depth of 
stoped for a length of 1,000 feet at the No. 10 level 
The ore reserves in the mine are estimated at 
from the Mount Lyell and North Mount Lyell Mines is smelted, in conjunction, 
in blast furnaces, in the proportion of 2 tons of the former to 1 of the latter. 
The matte is treated locally in converters, and the resulting blister copper is 
refined at the Port Kembla Works, New South Wales. 

The North Mount Lyell ore deposit extends into the Comstock section on 
the north. The Lyell Tharsis is a similar deposit of lower grade occurring 
in the schist ; it carries about 2 per cent, of copper. 

The North Coast. 

The Blythe River Iron Ore Deposit is situated about 10 miles from Burnie, 
on the North Coast. The ore body consists of a huge vertical bed or lens of 
hematite having a north-east and south-west strike for a distance of over a 
mile, and apparently interbedded with slates and sandstones of pre-Silurian 
-age. The Blythe Eiver has cut its way through the deposit which extends 
up both sides of the gorge. It has been estimated that there are at least 
20,000,000 tons of ore in the deposit above the level of the river. The deposit 
has been sampled over the whole outcrop, and the analysis gave an average 
yield of 63*259 per cent, of iron, 7 per cent, of silica, and 0"036 per cent, 
of phosphorus. Nothing has yet been done towards utilizing this valuable 
deposit of iron ore. 

Oil Shale Deposits of the North C oast. ~-ln the Mersey district there are 
deposits of a peculiar resinoid shale known as Tasmanite, which is believed 
to be of considerable commercial value as a source of fuel oil. The shale 
occurs as a seam in the Marine Sandstones of the Permo-Carboniferous series, 
and in the neiglibourhood of Latrobe it has an average thickness of 4 ft. 6 in. 
It is a brownish laminated rock consisting of sandy mud through which are dis- 
seminated numerous minute yellow resinous-looldng discs, which are believed 
-to be sporangia. The peculiarity of the resinoid discs is that they contain 
^bout 2 per cent, of sulphur in combination with their carbon and hydrogen. 
The average composition of the shale is as follows .— 

Moisture . . . . . . . . 1 * 10 

Volatile matter .. . . .. 29*69 

Fixed carbon .. .. .. 3*11 

Ash.. .. .. .. .. 66-10 

100-00 



Sulphur 



2 per cent. 



Mining Fields of Australia. 443 

The shale yields, by destructive distillation, from 30 to 50 gallons of oil 
per ton. Mr. Tvvelvetrees, Government Geologist, estimates that there are 
in the Mersey district 12,000,000 tons of shale containing 2,000,000 tons of 
crude oil, equal to 1| million tons of fuel oil. 

The Latrobe Shale and Oil Company are erecting retorts for the pro- 
duction of oil from Tasmanite. 

The Middlesex Field, situated near Railton, contains deposits of silver- 
lead, and also tin, bismuth, and wolfram. In the Round Hill Mine, 16 miles 
from Railton Silver-lead lodes occur in slates close to then- junction with 
conglomerates. About 1,000 tons of concentrates containing 56 per cent, 
of lead and 33 ounces of silver per ton have been produced. 

The Shepherd and Murphy Mine, 28 miles from Railton, contains narrow 
lodes in quartzite and garnet rock close to their junction with intrusive 
granite. The lodes contain cassiterite, bismuth, and wolfram impregnations 
in a quartz gangue. Nearly 40,000 tons of ore have been crushed and 671 tons 
of- concentrates produced. 

Beaconsfield Mining District, 

The celebrated Tasmania Gold Mine is situated at Beaconsfield on the 
west side of tte Tamar. Up to the end of 1912 this mine had treated 982,587 
tons of stone for a yield of 808,255 ounces, and had paid £772,671 in dividends. 
The last dividend was paid in 1905. Grubb's shaft is down to a depth of 
1,500 feet, and work is being carried out at this level. 

The lode occurs in slates, conglomerates, and sandstones, and was 40 feet 
wide on the surface, but became narrower and poorer in depth. It is an 
exceptionally wet mine, and is equipped with one of the finest pumping plants 
in the world. 

At Anderson's Creek, near Beaconsfield, there are deposits of hematite 
and magnetite containing a considerable proportion of chromium, which 
has hitherto interfered with their use, for smelting purposes. There are 
probably several million tons of ore in these deposits. 

The Lefroy Gold Field is situated 7 miles east of George Town, on the 
Tamar River. Auriferous reefs and alluvial deposits have been worked with 
considerable ?ucce^s in the past on this field. The total amount of gold won 
amounts to over 200,000 ounces, and dividends amounting to nearly £300,000 
have been paid, but tbe gold chutes have failed below a depth of 400 feet. 
At the present time the prospects of successfully working the deep alluvial 
(basalt-covered) leads appear to be hopeful. 

The Tin=Fields of the North=East Coast. 

A considerable area of tin-bearing granite occurs near the north-east 
coast, and tin mining has been carried on here with much success for over 
30 years. The tin-oxide is found as impregnations and small veins in the 
granite and greisen, and the decomposition and denudation of tliese rocks has 
resulted in the concentration of large quantities of stream tin in the Tertiary 
basalt-covered deep leads along the course of the Ringarooma River, and 
also in the Pleistocene and recent alluvial deposits. The shallow alluvials 
were of course worked first, and the tin was subsecpiently traced down into 
the deep leads. The latter are being successfully worked by hydraulic 
sluicing in sucli mines as the Arba, Briseis, Pioneer, Garibaldi, and Clifton 
C.121.54 2 F 



444 Federal Handbook. 



Creek. The Briseis has removed 4,746,000 cubic yards of overburden and 
4,600,000 cubic yards of drift for a yield of 9,589 tons of stream tin, valued 
at £1,125,700, and has paid dividends amounting to £380,000. The Pioneer, 
which is worked by hydro-electric power, has treated 5,720,900 cubic yards 
of gi'avel for a yield of 4,832 tons of stream tin, and has paid £254,095 in 
dividends. 

A most remarkable example of economical mining is supplied by the 
Anchor Tin Mine at Lottah, where the tin is being won from the solid granite 
or greisen. The ore bodies are covered by an overburden of as much as 
100 feet, in places, of barren granite, which, being moie or less decomposed, 
is partly removed by hydraulicing. The Anchor Mine has crushed 1,200,000 
tons of rock for an average yield of less than 3| lbs. of tin oxide per ton. The 
cost of mining, crushing, and concentrating, during ten years' work, has 
been from 2s. 6d. to 3s. per ton of stone. The ore is worked by open cut, 
and hydraulic power is employed for the mill. 

The Sca)7iander Field. — A few miles from Scamander, on the east coast, 
there are low grade deposits of tin, copper, wolfram, silver, and gold. None 
of these are at present being economically worked, though prospecting opera- 
tions are being carried out in tin-bearing quartzites close to theii junction 
with granite. 

In the Mathinna Field, 17 miles north of Fingal, a number of quartz reefs 
was successfully worked for some years. The principal mine was the New 
Golden Gale, which was tested to a depth of 1,800 feet, where the ore ceased 
to be payable. Between 1888 and 1904 the mine yielded 232,225 ounces of 
gold, from 277,393 tons of stone, and paid £355,200 in dividends. 

Coal. 

Tasmania is not so fortunately situated as the other eastern States in 
regard to her coal resources The coal measures of Tasmania are of two 
ages, viz., (1) Permo-Carboniferous ; and (2) Mesozoic. 

(1) The Permo-Carboniferous measures are characterized by thin coal 
seams (from 1 to 2 feet in thickness) of fair quality, though high in moisture 
and sulphur. The average composition of tne coal is as follows . — 

Moisture .. .. .. .. 12-9 

Volatile hydiocarbons .. .. 36*5 

Fixed carbon . . . . . . 46 • 6 

Ash.. .. .. .. .. 40 



100-00 



It is suitable for domestic use and for steam raising, but contains an excess 
of sulphur. The principal localities where it occui's are the Mersey Coal- 
field, near Latrobe, and the Preolenna Coal-field, 18 miles from Wynyard, 
but it is not being worked at present. 

(2) The Mesozoic coal measures cover a large area of the State, but 
unfortunately they have been much faulted and dislocated by intrusions of 
diabase. They contain seams up to 12 feet in thickness, but the workable 
coal seldom exceeds 6 feet. The quality of the coal varies considerably, but 
it is usually high in ash and moisture ; it is useful for domestic purposes, and 



Mining Fields of Australia. 



445 



is also employed in tlie locomotives on brancli railways. The two principal 
collieries working this coal are the Mount Nicholas and the Cornwall, near 
St Mary's, which have an annual output of about 30,000 tons each. Mr. 
Twelvetrees estimates the probable coal reserves as follows : — 

Permo-Carboniferous . . . . 13,000,000 tons 

Mesozoic .. .. .. 54,800,000 „ 



Total 



67,800,000 tons 



Table showing the Quantity and Value of Minerals Won during 

THE Year 1912, and to the end of 1912. 

Tasmania. 





Production for Year ending 


Total Production from 1880 




31st December, 1912. 


to 1912 inclusive 


Mineral, 












Quantity. 


Value. 


Quantity. 


Value. 


Gold 


37,973 ozs. 


£ 
161,300 


1 

£ 
1,738,661 ozs. 6,914,132 


Sih'er-lead ore 


90,124 tons 


303,098 


950,613 tons 5,488,286 


Blister copper 


5,136 „ 


430,965 


122,912 . 


9,728,833 


Copper matte 






6,227 . 


133,736 


Copper and copper ore 


1,391 tons 


9,479 


35,135 , 


536,014 


Tin 




3,714 „ 


543,103 


109,915 , 


10,884,922 


Iron ore 








42,762 , 


25,701 


Coal 




53,560 tons 


24,568 


1,312,460 . 


, 1,057,700 


Wolfram 




66 „ 


6,601 


402 , 


36,033 


Bismuth 




7 ,. 


2,646 


43 , 


14,961 


Asbestos 








374 . 


: 521 


Shale 








864 , 


464 


Osmiridium 


779 ozs. 


5,742 


1,170 oz 


s. 8,160 


Unenumerated prior to 1 894 . . 


•• 






31,988 


1 


'otal 


1,493,502 


34,861,451 



5. Western Australia. 

The State of Western Australia occupies the western third of the conti- 
nent, and is estimated to embrace an area of 975,920 square miles. 

The inception of active mining operations in Australia dates from the 
year 1842, when lead and copper lodes were first discovered and worked at 
Waneranooka in the Northampton district of Western Australia. Since 
then the State has produced mineral products the total value of which, 
up to the end of 1912, amounts to £113,660,065 ; of this 54-5 per cent, has 
been obtained from the East Coolgardie Gold-field, which contains the 
important gold mining centre of Kalgoorlie. The real mining history, however, 
dates from the year 1893. 

The mineral fields are numerous and scattered over a very wide area. 
The total area of the proclaimed mineral fields amounts to 329,828 square 
miles ; the position of these, as legally defined by the authorities, has been 
shown on the map of AVestern Australia included in the Report of the 
Department of Mines for the year 1912. The legal boundaries of the 
mineral fields, however, bear no relation whatever to the geological 
boundaries. 

2f 2 



446 Federal Handbook. 



The principal mineral products of greatest importance in "Western 
Australia, arranged in order of value, at the end of 1912, are gold, copper, 
coal, tin, lead, and phosphates. The metals and metalliferous minerals 
make up by far the greater proportion of the value of the output, being 
over 98 per cent, of the total. 

The south-western corner of the State from Israelite Bay to Cape Leeuwin, 
and as far north as latitude 25° south, is a more or less broken tableland 
from which rise isolated hills and ridges of metamorphic and crystalline 
rocks to which a pre-Cambrian age has been assigned. This plateau forms 
the chief mineral region of the State. Isolated patches of variable extent of 
these older pre-Cambrian rocks rise from beneath the newer strata in the 
north-west and Kimberley divisions, and are as important from the mineral 
stand-point as in the south-western plateau. 

The pre-Cambrian rocks are remarkable for the variety of useful and 
valuable minerals they contain, numbering up to date no less than 196. 

There are sound reasons for knowing that the major portion of this pre- 
Cambrian plateau has been a land surface since early Palaeozoic times, and 
having had such a peaceful geological history, there has not been very much 
opportunity for mineralization, hence the valuable ores have a very wide 
distribution instead of, with certain notable exceptions, being concentrated 
into very rich deposits. Whilst this is so, the results obtained by geological 
exploration, prospecting, and mining operations indicate quite clearly that 
the mineral industry of the State will not only be progressive but great. 
The future of gold mining in Western Australia, however, must in a great 
measure depend upon the exploitation of its low-grade deposits of which 
there are very many. 

Geologically the pre-Cambrian plateau is characterized by a more or less 
complicated structure. The plateau forms one general geological province 
in which the nature and mode of occurrence of the mineral deposits are more 
or less identical throughout. The interdependence of the mineral belts on 
the geological structure is exceptionally well marked in all parts of the State. 
The rocks are of very different types ; many of them are in a crystalline 
condition and form coarse crystalline schists and gneiss as well as basic rocks, 
which have been more or less crushed, foliated, and completely converted 
into greenstone schists. The basic rocks comprise gabbro, dolerite, por- 
phyrite, epidiorite, pyroxenite ; in some localities these basic rocks can be 
seen passing by scarcely perceptible gradations into hornblende schists and 
allied rocks. Some of these older rocks are of sedimentary origin and are 
practically unaltered ; others are quartz and mica schists, and in certain 
localities are cleaved conglomerates, some of the pebbles in which consist 
of a pre-existing conglomerate from a very much older series. The less 
altered members of these ancient sediments consist of a great variety of types 
of indurated slates, quartzites and conglomerates, together with igneous 
rocks, which probably represent lavas and ashes. 

These older rocks are invaded by batholitho and veins of granite and 
allied rocks, which in many parts of the State occupy very large areas. The 
old granitic rocks are traversed by many large ice-like quartz reefs, which 
rise like walls to considerable altitudes above the surface. The mode of 
occurrence, etc., of these large quartz masses point to their being of igneous 



Mining Fields of Australia. 447 



origin, representing the final product of the differentiations of a granitic 
magma, its ultra-acid portion. These older granitic rocks are of considerable 
importance by reason of the fact that they form the matrices of the tin and 
allied deposits of the State. 

The mineral deposits of Western Australia occur in areas generally as 
more or less parallel belts of relatively narrow lateral dimensions, though in 
certain localities they appear as small isolated areas or patches. These 
narrow well-defined belts have a general north-west and south-west direction, 
with occasional divergencies of several degrees on either side. The ore 
deposits in these belts or zones, owing to dynamo-metamorphic processes, 
do not crop out in long lines, but are cut up into relatively short lenticles, 
arranged en echelon. 

There are in all, 24 proclaimed mineral fields in the State, though there 
are in addition other areas which have been proved to be mineral-bearing, 
but which have not as yet been brought within the limits of any legally 
defined mineral field. Most of the mineral fields of Western Australia pro- 
duce other metals besides gold, though in nearly all cases that is by far the 
most important product. 

Kimherley Gold-field. — This, the most northerly gold-field in the State, 
discovered in 1882, is of historical importance, though it has not been a 
very notable gold producer. 

The gold belt of Kimberley, a succession of crystalline schists of remark- 
able persistence, has been proved to extend from Denham River to Mount 
Dockrell, also in the Mueller Range, from whence it strikes north-westward 
along the foot of the King Leopold Range to King Sound. 

This belt of rocks, micaceous and talcose schists, gneiss, and granite, 
varies in width from 10 to 30 miles, and has been shown to have a horizontal 
extent of at least 120 miles. 

Mining and prospecting operations have been confined, however, to only 
six, more or less, isolated centres. These up to the end of 1912 have only 
produced 17,012 -75 ozs. of fine gold. 

Pilbara Gold-field. — The Pilbara Gold-field contains several gold and 
tin-bearing areas, scattered over different portions of the district ; economi- 
cally, however, the auriferous deposits have proved up to the present to be 
the most important. 

The geographical position of the various gold-mining centres shows a 
zonal development of the auriferous deposits which may be divided into six 
main and distinct groups, viz. : — 
(a) Lalla Rookh. 
(6) North Pole, Taiga Taiga, Bamboo. 

(c) Marble Bar, Warrawoona, Yandicoogina, Mount Elsie, Boodal- 

yerri ; 

(d) Nullagine, 20-mile Sandy, Mosquito Creek ; 

(e) Tambourah, Western Shaw ; and 
(/) North Shaw. 

The length of the Lalla Rookh Belt has not yet been defined, but it 
does not appear to be less than 30 or 40 miles. The North Pole, Taiga Taiga, 
and Bamboo Belt is 50 miles in length. The Marble Bar, Warrawoona, 
Yandicoogina, Mount Elsie and Boodalyerri Belt has a proved extent of 



44S Federal Handbook. 



about 80 miles. The Nullagine, Middle, and Sandy Creek zone is known to 
extend for a distance of at least 40 miles, and there are strong geological 
reasons for the belief that it continues much farther to the east and may 
possibly cross the upper reaches of the Oakover Eiver. The Tambourah and 
Western Shaw Belt has not as yet been accurately defined, but it does not 
appear to be less than about 30 miles in length, whilst that of the North Shaw 
has only been proved to extend for a few miles. 

The general direction of these auriferous belts almost everywhere coincides 
with the strike of the schists which, with one or two exceptions, invariably 
form the matrices of the gold-bearing reefs. The prevailing dip of the 
belts coincides with the general trend of the main structural features of the 
district. Their width naturally varies, and in the three most northerly 
zones the width cannot be defined owing to the fact that one of the boundaries 
is invariably marked by a powerful fault, which throws down the newer beds 
against the schists. 

Quartz reefs occur in great abundance all through the schistose rocks, 
as well as to a more limited extent in the areas occupied by the granitic rocks. 
The quartz reefs are of two distinct types, viz., white quartz reefs and lami- 
nated quartz and jasper veins approaching very closely the hematite-bearing 
quartzites (?) which invariably form a conspicuous featm^e in most of the 
gold-fields of the State. Some of the laminated quartz veins range from 
almost pure quartz, through banded jaspers, with crystals of magnetite, 
to bands appearing to the eye to be virtually pure hematite. The quartz 
reefs, of what may be called the massive types, occur plentifully in both the 
schists and the granites. They invariably occur along the planes of folia- 
tion (? bedding) of the schists, or, at any rate, cut them at a low angle. 

The auriferous reefs cannot be said to be long, and are, as a rule, small, 
though they occasionally swell out into large lenticular masses. Some of 
the reefs have been traced along the outcrop for over 2,000 feet, and have 
swelled out to masses measuring about 15 feet across. 

In addition to the gold derived from quartz reefs, the conglomerates at 
the base of the Nullagine Series have been mined in two localities — Nullagine 
and Just-in-time. It is noteworthy that the base of the series has only 
proved auriferous in those places where it lies upon that portion of the under- 
lying formation which carries auriferous quartz reefs. 

At Nullagine the auriferous strata occur through a thickness of about 
300 feet of grits, sandstones, and conglomerates, which form the lowest 
portion of the series. The auriferous conglomerate is of sedimentary origin, 
and is made up of rounded and subangular fragments of the underlying 
strata. Those portions of the strata which have proved to be gold-bearing 
are those which are largely impregnated with the oxides and sulphides of 
iron, and which lie between a well-marked fault and a greenstone dyke. 
Mining operations have, up to the present time, been confined exclusively 
to the oxidized zone of the conglomerate and to very limited and shallow 
depths. The available evidence regarding the origin of the gold seems to 
indicate that it is a secondary and not an original constituent of the con- 
glomerate ; and owed its introduction to the percolation of mineral-bearing 
solutions down the most porous portions of the conglomerate, this condition 
being facilitated by the downward inclination of the bedrock, and possibly 



MiNixG Fields of Australia. 449 

accentuated in part by the folding which the strata have undergone. 
Numerous dry-blowers have been at work for a number of years over that 
portion of the conglomerate from which the crusliings have been obtained, 
and have acquired a considerable quantity of gold, of which the published 
figures afford no clue. In all probability one-half of the " alluvial " gold 
from Nullagine may be legitimately claimed to have been derived from the 
escarpment of the conglomerate. 

At Just-in-time, 8 miles to the south of Marble Bar, another auriferous 
conglomerate at the base of the series has been worked. In many respects 
the auriferous conglomerate resembles the ferruginous bands as developed 
at Nullagine, and varies in thickness from an inch up to 5 feet. Certain 
portions of it contain a sufficient quantity of iron oxides to give quite a 
distinctive character to the rock. The auriferous conglomerate of Just-in- 
time, is, however, not of any very great horizontal extent, nor does it appear 
to penetrate to any considerable depth. As has been the case at Nulla- 
gine, the sloping ground at the foot of the escarpment has yielded considerable 
quantities of gold to the dry-blowers, but; unfortunately, it did not appear 
to have been possible to keep a separate record thereof. Most of the gold 
obtained in this way owed its origin to the disintegration of the conglomerate. 

The Pilbara Gold-field has, up to the close of 1912, produced 166,914 '21 
ozs. of fine gold, of which 3,264 "59 ozs. have been obtained from the 
conglomerate. 

West Pilbara Gold-field. — The West Pilbara Gold-field is of some his- 
torical interest in that it contains one of the oldest mining centres in the 
State. The mining history of the field opened with the discovery of rich 
copper and lead deposits in the vicinity of Roebourne during the year 1872, 
though it was not until five years later that auriferous quartz reefs were re- 
ported and opened out. Since then West Pilbara has turned out 54,172 "84 
tons of copper ore and 22,601 "98 ozs. of fine gold in addition to small 
quantities of tin and iron ore. The area of the West Pilbara field, as legally 
defined by the authorities, embraces 9,480 square miles, of which, however, 
only about 1,500 are occupied by mineral-bearing formations, for by far the 
largest portion of the field is covered with the andesites, dolerites, con- 
glomerates, quartzites, and shales of the Nullagine Series, which effectually 
conceal the older rocks beneath. The remaining portions of the field con- 
sist of granite and gneiss, together with a series of metamorphic rocks of both 
sedimentary and igneous origin, and a series of basic dykes of pre-Nullagine 
age. The valuable ore deposits of West Pilbara are confined to the northern 
and eastern portions of the field. 

The most important gold mining centre is Station Peak, situated on the 
head waters of the Peewah River. In its geological structure, Station Peak 
is comparatively simple, consisting of a highly inclined series of sedimentary 
rocks invaded by basic and acidic dykes. The sediments are traversed by 
a dyke of quartz-dolerite, which varies from 800 to 1,000 feet in width ; this 
dyke forms the most important economic feature in the geology of the 
field, owing to its forming the matrix of the reefs which up to the present 
time have proved to be auriferous. The gold-bearing qiiartz reefs of Station 
Peak have a more or less parallelism, which is roughly approximate to the 
general strike of the dolerite. The reefs vary in thickness from J inch up 



450 Federal Handbook. 



to as mucL. as 20 feet, whilst the maximum length attained by the most 
important is 4,000 feet. These reefs have yielded 9,382 ozs. of fine gold, 
from the milling of 9,993 tons of quartz. This yield forms nearly one-half 
of the total gold-output of the West Pilbara Field. 

Pre-Cambrian deposits of several types, containing copper, gold, anti- 
mony, etc., are found in several parts of the district, associated with those 
bands of laminated quartzite which make such conspicuous features in the 
structural geology of the field. 

Up to the end of 1912, the West Pilbara Field has produced 22,601 -98 
ozs. of fine gold. 

Ashburton and Gascoyne Gold-fields. — The Ashburton and Gascoyne 
Gold-fields are situated on the headwaters of the Ashburton and Gascoyne 
Rivers respectively. They do not embrace any large area, and haye not so 
far been very noteworthy gold producers. There is a great diversion of 
geological formations, though in its broad outlines the geological features 
of the gold-fields are fairly simple. 

As is the case in West Pilbara by far the larger known area is made up 
of representatives of the Nullagine Series, which constitute the high plateau 
breached by the Ashburton River. The two fields contain several minor 
gold-bearing areas, scattered over widely separated localities. The auriferous 
deposits are of diverse types, and possibly of different geological ages. 

At Bangemall, on the Lyons River, in the Gascoyne Gold-field, the produc- 
tive auriferous area lies between two beds of micaceous quartz schist, forming 
the legs of a denuded anticline, which has a decided pitch to the south-east. 
These two bands trend across country for considerable distances, and are 
associated with auriferous quartz veins. The most important feature, 
however, is the saddle reef nature of the quartz veins, which bears a striking 
resemblance to those of Bendigo in Victoria. 

There are some sound geological reasons for believing this auriferous 
belt to extend as far westward as Mount Egerton. 

The gold-bearing zone of the Ashburton Valley is defined to the escarp- 
ment of the Nullagine Series which flank both walls thereof, and has been 
estimated at 10,000 square miles. There are five centres at which mining 
operations have at one time or another been carried on. The primary gold 
deposits are contained in a highly inclined series of sedimentary rocks, 
quartzites, grits, and slates, having an average strike of 122 degrees. The 
beds are in most cases traversed by quartz reefs of varying dimensions and 
interrupted continuity. The strata are disposed in a series of more or less 
acute folds, and the reefs, which occur on the flanks of the arches, may pos- 
sibly represent the legs of saddle reefs now modified by denudation. The 
coarse gold obtained from many of the gullies doubtless owed its origin to the 
disintegration of the quartz reefs. 

Up to the close of 1913 these two fields have produced 9,411 -04 ozs. of 
fine gold. 

Peak Hill, Murchison, Yalgoo, and Yilgarn Gold-fields. — The dependence 
of the mineral-bearing zones on geological structure is exceptionally well- 
marked in the three most westerly, of what may be called the Central Gold- 
fields. The important ore deposits are confined largely to a diagonal belt 
extending from Mount Beasley, on the north, to Mount Singleton, near the 



Mining Fields of Australia. 451 

extremity of the westernmost arm of Lake Lefroy, ou the south. The mines 
of the belt yield almost entirely gold, though there are a few localities from 
which small quantities of copper and tin have been obtained and are not so 
far of any great importance. The geological structure of the mineral zone 
is remarkable for its uniformity ; it may be described as a series of more or 
less persistent zones of schists and allied metamorphic (in parts sedimentary) 
rocks forming a distinct lithological province. The schists and their asso- 
ciated rocks are remarkable for their persistent strike and horizontal extent, 
one belt alone having been proved to extend for at least 60 miles. These 
zones of schists are everywhere surrounded by granite, which seems to be of 
two distinct geological ages, viz., an older, which has undergone the same 
dynamic alteration to which the schists owe their origin, and a much newer, 
which penetrates the older granite as well as the schists. The schists are 
associated with diabase (dolerite), pyroxenite, and allied rocks, and there 
are sound reasons for believing that some at any rate of the schists merely 
represent crushed or plated out varieties of the basic rocks. Some of the 
basic rocks are traversed by belts of laminated quartzes intersected by 
numerous faults, which are of considerable economic importance by reason 
of the fact that it is along these fault lines that rich shoots of gold often 
occur. 

The principal mining centre along this belt is Day Dawn, where one of 
the largest solid quartz reefs (the Great Fingall) mined anywhere is situated. 
This reef, which has an outcrop of about 30 chains in length, produced up to 
the end of 1912, 1,080,415 ozs. of fine gold, and 150,470 ozs. of silver from the 
milling of 1,642,089 tons of ore. The outcrop, when first discovered, was of 
considerable size, and rose above the general level of the surface in a series 
of camel-backed ridges, from 10 to 20 feet in height. 

The average dip of the reef is about 60 degrees to the south westward, 
and its maximum thickness 40 feet. The lowest vertical depth at which the 
reef has been mined is 2,342 feet. The great Fingall Lode is more or less 
transverse to the general trend of the " Auriferous Series," and occupies a 
relatively narrow belt of schistose amphibolite which is traversed by basaltic 
dolerite and porphyry dykes. The quartz below water level contains small 
quantities of pyi'ites, pyrrhotite, mispickel, zincblende, galena, and a little 
copper pyrites. 

The mineral zone, which traverses the Murchison Gold-field, seems to be 
continuous southward through the Yilgarn Field, of which the official centre 
is Southern Cross. The first authentic gold find on the Yilgarn Gold-field 
was made at Ennuin in 1887 ; this was shortly afterwards followed by the 
discovery of the pioneer mine, Frasers, at Southern Cross, which has been 
continuously worked for over 25 years. 

The Frasers Lode occupies a belt of considerable length, and it outcrops 
at intervals in the form of lenses occurring in a shear zone of amphibolite 
and its derivatives. This shear zone contains more or less pyrites, and it has 
been found the gold values bear an intimate relation to the extent of its 
mineralization. The lode is intersected, in a direction at right angles to the 
general trend, by dykes of pegmatite granite, and where this occurs there is a 
slight impoverishment of the lode at the points of contact. 



452 Federal Handbook. 



The Yilgarn Gold-field has, since its discovery, produced 407,770 ozs. of 
fine gold, of which the Erasers Lode alone yielded 172,471 ozs. of fine gold. 
These banded ferruginous quartz lodes when seen below the oxidized zone 
pass into schists with pyrites with thin seams of magnetite and pyrrhotite. 
The Mount Caudan Bore, put down in what is regarded as the southerly 
extension of the Erasers Lode ore channel, passed through 100 feet of massive 
pyrrhotite at a depth of 600 feet from the surface. The pjrrrhotite, however, 
contained only a minute trace of gold. 

The mineral zone, in which this persistent ore channel lies, is of consider- 
able horizontal extent ; it is really constituted of a series of very long belts 
arranged more or less en echelon, and encased in basic rocks, some of which 
may be of sedimentary origin. The larger area of the field is of granite, 
which is of distinctly later origin than the greenstones, which are invaded by 
dykes of pegmatite and veins of granite quartz. 

The Yilgarn Gold-field has, since the inception of mining operations, 
produced 407,770 ozs. of fine gold. 

The Eastern Gold-fields. — There is a remarkable uniformity in the geo- 
logical structure and mode of occurrence of the mineral deposits of the 
Eastern Gold-fields. The auriferous districts are of interest on account of 
their wide distribution and regular mode of occurrence of the gold-bearing 
deposits. 

Very large areas of the surface are covered with a variable thickness of 
recent accumulations, which are sometimes solidified into cement. 

The staple formation, however, is granite, gneiss, and a series of schistose 
rocks, some of which are of sedimentary origin ; associated with these are 
large areas of basic rocks of difierent types and possibly of difierent origins. 
As in other portions of the State the general strike of the schists is north- 
west ; they are very often vertical or at any rate inclined at high angles. Gold 
occurs generally at no gi'eat distance from granite intrusions and along 
shear zones or shatter belts containing quartz veins or quartz lenses. These 
zones or belts are often cut by pegmatites and porphyry dykes, which in places 
have been fractured and the resulting cracks filled with quartz. The acid 
dykes are often impregnated with iron pyrites which is occasionally auriferous. 
The schistose rocks are often associated with hematite-bearing quartzites, 
some of which might be concentrated into high grade iron ores. The pro- 
portion of oxide of iron in these rocks varies from practically pure hematite 
to a pure quartz rock, often permeated by secondary silica which has also 
penetrated the surrounding rocks. These banded quartzites are occasionally 
auriferous. 

In the North-east Coolgardie Gold-field, considerable interest attaches to 
the alluvial leads, the most prominent of which is the North Lead at Kanowna. 
This lead lies in an old water-course carved out of the older rocks, and has 
been proved to be not merely a simple isolated run of auriferous gravel, but 
part of a series of old stream deposits. The width of the North Lead varies 
from 2 to 80 feet, whilst the thickness of the deposit in the old channel varies 
from a few inches up to 90 feet. The fall of the lead is about 40 feet to the 
mile. The deposit consists of surface loam, underlaid by a gravelly ironstone, 
often partially cemented by kaolin and oxide of iron into solid rock ; beneath 
this lies a bed or beds of practically pure kaolin (" pug ") and a varying 



Mining Fields of Australia. 453 



thickness of a pebbly quartz wash. The quartz wash is occasionally cemented 
by secondary silica into a hard compact quartzite. Most of the gold in the 
North Lead has been won from the quartz wash, although the overlying 
kaolin and ironstone gravel have also yielded fair quantities. The ultimate 
derivation of the gold in the North Lead is from the quartz veins and lodes 
(upon which the wash directly reposes in places) by which the fundamental 
rocks are traversed. The gold is not exclusively in the form of grains, scales, 
etc., but is found occurring in the quartz pebbles themselves. In addition to 
the undoubtedly detrital fold, there is another massive, arborescent or 
coarsely crystalline form which occurs, filling certain irregular cracks and 
covering cleavage planes or shrinkage cracks so as to prevent the appearance 
of painted surfaces. The mode of occurrence, associations, and character 
of this gold all point to a secondary origin, and it is of importance to note that 
this secondary gold has been deposited from solution, not only in the alluvium 
and other superficial deposits, but also in the zone of decomposition of the 
bed-rock. These secondary forms of gold, which result in the superficial 
enrichment of many gold-bearing deposits, are a not uncommon feature in the 
mineral fields of the State. 

The East Coolgardie Gold-field, the most productive in Australia, which 
has yielded £13,364,384 of gold, or about 55 per cent, of the total yield of the 
State, embraces an area of 632 square miles. The principal mining centre 
on the gold-field is Boulder, the wealth of which coupled with the skill which 
directs both the mining and metalliu'gical operations, has raised Western 
Australia to the front rank of gold-mining countries in the British Empii'e. 

The productive area of Boulder comprises a relatively small block of 
ground, which by reason of the richness of the lodes by which it is riddled, 
has become known throughout the world as the " Golden Mile." This area 
includes the Great Boulder, Ivanhoe, Golden Horseshoe, Perseverance, Oroya- 
Brown Hill, Associated, and Lake View Consols Gold Mines. The deepest 
shaft is over 2,800 feet vertically below the surface, and the country laid 
open by mining for investigation amounts to several miles, whilst the rocks 
have been riddled with bore-holes in all directions, thus affording oppor- 
tunities for the scientific study of many of the rocks in critical localities and 
in their relation to the ore deposits, such as are hardly to be found in any other 
single mining field on the globe. 

The rocks of Kalgoorlie and Boulder consist of : — (a) Ancient sedimentary 
rocks ; (6) older greenstones (calc-schists and fine-grained amphibolites) ; 

(c) newer greenstones (quartz-diabase and coarse-grained amphibolite) ; 

(d) peridotites ; (e) porphyrites ; and (/) quartz and felspar porphyries. 
The ancient sedimentary rocks consist of shales, soft sandstones, and 

conglomerates and boulder beds, associated with what appear to be inter- 
bedded lava flows. These sedimentary rocks have a general north-north- 
west trend, and an average dip of about 80 degrees to the west. They cover 
a very wide extent of country and have been found near Coolgardie in the 
west, and Kurnalpi on the east, whilst a similar series of metamorphic sedi- 
ments have been found to the southward at Norseman on the Dundas Field, 
where they are intersected by a large number of quartz dykes which form 
the apophyses of the large granite mass lying to the east of the Norseman 
auriferous belt. 



454 Federal Handbook. 



The sedimentary series of Kalgoorlie are traversed by banded jasperoid 
and hematite quartz, of that type which forms such a conspicuous feature 
in the geology of the sedimentary area of Uaroo, in the Ashburton watershed. 
There seems to be some reason for believing the Kalgoorlie sedimentary 
rocks to be divisible into two distinct series of different geological age, and 
distinctly newer than the complex which forms the axis of the Boulder 
auriferous belt. 

Of the rocks of the Boulder-Kalgoorlie igneous complex, the quartz 
diabase is the most important as it is within this and its alteration products 
that the principal gold-bearing deposits at present known occur. The 
quartz diabase is as a rule massive, though owing to the dynamical and con- 
comitant chemical alteration which it has undergone, the rock occasionally 
assumes a more or less schistose phase. 

The principal effect of the chemical alteration has been the extreme 
carbonating which has gone on over certain portions of the mass, this being 
naturally greatest where the shearing of the rocks has been most pronounced. 
The diabase, owing to this chemical alteration, has been converted into an 
indefinite mixture of carbonates of lime, iron, and magnesia, with some 
residual silicates and a good deal of secondary and some original quartz. 
The carbonating is often of considerable extent and has been proved to be 
fairly deep seated, having been noticed at depths of over 2,000 feet. 

The ore deposits of the field form relatively narrow bands, trending generally 
north-west and south-east. Many of the ore lenses are of great length, and 
in some cases of considerable breadth ; at times, however, the lateral con- 
tinuity of the lenses is interrupted by overthrust and normal faults of very 
variable downthrow. The principal lode minerals, in addition to gold and 
tellurides (calaverite, petzite, sylvanite, hessite, coloradoite, and altaite) 
are iron-pyrites, marcasite, chalcopyrite, tennantite, asbolite, carbonates 
(of iron, lime, and magnesia), sulphates (of lime and magnesia), iron ore 
(haematite, magnetite, ilmenite, etc.), tourmaline, chlorite, albite, rutile, etc. 
Next to the gold and tellurides, iron pyrites is the most important of the 
lode minerals ; the grain or texture of the pyrites seems to bear some intimate 
relationship to the gold contents, and it has been noticed that the finer the 
gi'ain the higher the gold values. 

Copper Fields. — The known workable deposits of copper occurring in 
Western Australia are everywhere met with in areas which have been subject 
to violent earth movement and concomitant volcanic activity. They all 
show more or less similarity in their associations, mineralogical characters, 
and structural relations. 

Copper mining, however, is not as yet a very important feature in the 
mineral production of the State, though the State's total output of copper 
ore up to the end of 1912 amounts to 185,93.5 '08 tons. Copper ores, however, 
are widely distributed throughout the length and breadth of the State, but 
owing to a variety of causes have been worked only in a very few districts. 
The principal sources of copper are West Pilbara, Mount Morgans, and the 
Phillips Eiver ; the largest output, 72,190 tons, being from Phillips River, 
54,172 tons from West Pilbara, and 47,860 tons from Mount Morgans. 

The Phillips River field consists of a series of metamorphic sedimentary 
rocks, associated with a complex series of crystalline rocks, which latter are 



Mining Fields of Australia. 455 



of igneous origin, and range from granite to serpentine with, their cleaved 
and schistose varieties. The lodes of the field, which have a uniform strike 
of east-north-east, are of two types ; the first being basic cupriferous dykes, 
and the second siliceous or ferruginous deposits, of what may be called the 
shear-zone type. 

The Mount Malcolm Copper Mine at Eulaminna (late Anaconda) in the 
Mount Morgans district, has yielded nearly one-third of the copper production 
of the State. The whole of the copper-bearing belt is in basic rock, with 
quartz, jasper, and ironstone veins, which show little or no copper at the 
surface. The ore has been concentrated into zones of enrichment, in reality 
bonanzas, three of which have been worked at the surface to comparatively 
shallow depths. Nothing very definite is known of the precise geological 
relationships of the Anaconda copper deposit. 

The West Pilbara Gold-field has been a large producer of copper, which, 
however, has been obtained principally from one property, the Whim Well 
Copper Mine. This lode has proved to be the largest and richest copper ore 
body yet discovered in Western Australia in the oxidized zone. The country 
rock in which the deposit is situated is a weathered talcose schist, associated 
with beds of a sedimentary origin. The ore deposit is a very flat-lying 
lode, conforming to the bedding of the enclosing schist country, which has a 
general strike of north-west and south-east. 

Ti7i Fields.— There are only two districts in Western Australia in which 
tin mining has been carried on, viz., Greenbushes and Pilbara. From the 
former locality 8,477 tons of tin ore have been raised, whilst the latter pro- 
duced 4,886 tons ; a small quantity, however, has been obtained from the 
Murchison Gold-field. 

Wherever the tin deposits of Western Australia have been examined 
they are invariably found to fall into two distinct geological categories : — 

1. Superficial deposits, which include (a) alluvial deposits ; and 

(6) residual sands, gravels, etc. ; and 

2. Deposits in country rock, which embrace (c) tin-bearing granite 

and allied rocks ; and {d) tin-bearing dykes. 

The alluvial deposits which are the most important of any yet opened 
out in the State, vary very largely in nature and range from an extremely 
hard ferruginous conglomerate to a stiff clay or loose sand or gravel. The 
tin-stone in the first-named is often extremely coarse, whilst that in the 
softer material is almost uniformly fine. 

In the Greenbushes field the alluvial deposits may be divided into two 
main groups, the older being the old river courses or deep leads, and the 
newer being represented by the existing channels. 

In the latter the tin-bearing gravels often lie at from 10 to 40 feet from 
the present stream bottoms ; the older deep leads attain considerable depths, 
the deepest being 96 feet. 

The residual deposits are either lateritic ironstone or sands, clays, etc., 
derived from the decomposition in situ, of igneous rocks. Deposits of this 
type are frequently stanniferous, the chief minerals accompanying the tin 
are limonite, quartz, tourmaline, and mica. 



456 Federal Handbook. 



Coal-fields. — The Collie Coal-field is the only one upon which any active 
operations are being carried on, though there are districts in the State in 
which lignites and brown coals occur. 

The Collie Coal-field lies to the east of Bunbury and south of Perth, near 
the north-western edge of the tableland which succeeds the Coastal Plain. 
The area occupied by the coal measures is approximately 50 square miles. 
The strata consist of alternations of shales, sandstones, and grits of Permo- 
Carboniferous age, which rest directly upon granite, schists, and other crys- 
talline rocks. The boundary of the field is, with one exception, everywhere 
defined by faults ; on the south-western side of the field the bound iry fault 
has been estimated to have a downthrow to the north-east of at least 2,000 
feet. There are several coal seams on the field, which are of variable thickness, 
the greatest being the Wallsend seam, which varies from 9 to 17 feet. Accord- 
ing to estimates which have been made, there is, omitting the seam? of trifling 
thickness, about 137 feet of coal in the 2,072 feet of strata so far explored 
by mining and boring operations. The coal workings are very shallow, 
and, owing to the comparative freedom of the field from serious tectonic 
disturbances, difficulties, which would otherwise be involved in working the 
seams, are not encountered. 

The coals of the Collie are hydrous, semi-bituminous, non-caking coals, 
which approach very closely to lignite in some parts ; between the various 
varieties, however, the differences are only of degree. So far as departmental 
analyses indicate, it appears that the average calorific value of the Collie 
coal is about 10,000 British thermal units. The coal is not of such high 
calorific value as the New South Wales coals, whilst, being noi-caking, it 
crumbles in the furnaces to some extent, and requires a certain amount of 
increased attention in firing. That from some of the seams has been found 
rather prone to spontaneous combustion. The Collie coal, although not of 
the best steam-producing quality, when burned in ordinary boiler furnaces, 
has been proved to be particularly suitable for use in suction-gas producers. 

The coal production of the State up to the end of 1912 — which is entirely 
that of the Collie Coal-field— amounted to 2,323,136 tons, valued at £1,069,435. 
The principal local consumers are the Government Railways and local manu- 
factories ; the gold-fields market for coal is limited, owing to good firewood 
supplies being available. 

6. The Northern Territory. 

The Northern Territory comprises an area of 523,620 square miles ; 
of this about 7,400 square miles of mineral-bearing country have been proved 
to exist in the north-western portion of the Territory, from which the prin- 
cipal products are gold, tin, and copper. These deposits, so far as investi- 
gations have at present been carried, are virtually confined to the pre-Cam- 
brian areas lying between the Daly and Mary Rivers. 

Since the first discovery of gold in the Northern Territory in 1869, there 
have been turned out up to the close of 1912, mineral products to the value 
of £2,543,000, of which gold alone amounted to £2,066,000. The mineral 
products arranged in the order of value are gold, tin, copper, and wolfram, 
together with small quantities of tantalite, amblygonite, and bismuth. The 
mineral production reached its zenith in 1906, when the output was valued 



Mining Fields of Australia. 457 



at £146,665 ; since then there has been a gradual decline, the value of the 
yield in 1912 being only £57,820. 

Enough detailed geological survey work has not yet been carried out to 
enable many details as to the occurrence and association of the deposits of 
the mineral fields of the Northern Territory to be definitely set out. 

The fundamental rocks of the Northern Territory are of pre-Cambrian 
age, they cover a very large area, and are of considerable economic importance 
as they appear, everywhere, to form the matrices of the principal mineral 
deposits. The pre-Gambrian rocks consist of gneiss, hornblende, and chlorite 
schist, slate, phyllite, quartzite, and conglomerate, which seem to have been 
intensely folded, the axes of the folds trending generally north-west and south- 
east. These ancient sedimentary and allied rocks are invaded by granite 
(of pre-Cambrian age), which appears to have some genetic connexion with 
the known tin and wolfram deposits ; the beds are also penetrated by basic 
rocks of various types. Around some of the granite batholiths are broad 
contact zones of quartz and tourmaline. Veins of quartz and tourmaline, 
in reality a very acid phase of the granitic magma, extend from the granite 
into the surrounding schists and very often contain ore of some value. 
Dykes of pegmatite quartz occur in some localities, e.g., Brock's Creek, and 
contain large bunches of copper ore. The metamorphic rocks, mica, seri- 
cite, talc, and chlorite schist are occasionally traversed by shear zones, 
trending generally north and south, which often contain mineral lodes of that 
irregular nature which are characteristic of belts of this particular type. 
The metamorphic rocks of the McArthur River have been subject to consider- 
able chemical and dynamical alteration, and are traversed by veins containing 
lead and copper ore, along joint cracks by which the beds are traversed. 
Igneous rocks are believed to exist at a depth of about 1,000 feet in the 
McArthur District, and to be responsible for the mineralization of the area. 

The tin-fields of the Northern Territory, which, up to the close of 1912, 
. have yielded tin ore valued at £329,000, are scattered over a fairly wide 
area, the bulk of which is stream tin. In addition to the stream and 
residual tin, ore has been found in pegmatite granite dykes traversing the 
slates, schists, and allied metamorphic rocks. The dykes trend generally 
in a more or less meridional direction, and the ore is disseminated through 
portions of the mass more or less thickly. The tin-bearing dykes in the West 
Arm and Bynoe Harbor fields are very numerous. In the Daly River Dis- 
trict tin ore has been obtained from a massive tom'maline rock, varying from 
50 to 100 feet in width, striking north-north-east. The lode occurs at the 
junction of quartzose, sandstone, and clay slate, the tin ore occurs in the 
tourmaline rock in small veins associated with quartz. Slugs of tin ore of 
considerable weight have been found in the debris near the outcrop. At the 
Horseshoe Creek and Mount Todd Tin-fields there is a considerable area of 
tin-bearing country. The tin ore in these localities, which occurs as veins 
and bunches in irregular fissures, traversed the highly inclined sedimentary 
rocks. The most highly ferruginous rocks are those which have been proved 
to be the richest in tin. 

Small quantities of tantalite and amblygonitc occur in the pegmatite 
dykes of the tin-fields of the Northern Territory, though no great quantity 
of the.se valuable minerals has yet been raised. 



458 Federal Handbook. 



Wolfram to the value of £40,607 has been mined in the Northern Terri- 
tory. At Brock's Wolfram Mine, near Wandi, is a deposit remarkable for 
the size and richness of the ore, which is probably the largest yet found in 
Australia. The wolfram deposit is a lenticular-shaped mass, containing 
massive wolfram, scheelite, quartz, and copper pyrites, occurring in a dyke 
which has a strike of north 20 degrees east, traversing metamorphic sand- 
stones and allied rocks. 

A very large proportion of the £2,000,000 worth of gold has been derived 
from the alluvial and residual deposits which cover a fairly wide extent of 
country. Gold mining has been carried out in the Darwin Mining District 
in the north, and in the small fields in the neighbourhood of the MacDonnell 
Ranges in the southern portion of the Territory. 

The Ai'ltunga Gold-field is situated in the southern portion of the Terri- 
tory, near the MacDonnell Ranges, where the general trend of the auriferous 
formations is north-west and south-east. The rocks consist of mica, horn- 
blende, and quartz schist, clay slate, limestone, and quartzite, associated 
with dykes of epidosite, pegmatite, and diorite. The quartz reefs have a 
general parallelism, coinciding with the strike of the enclosing rocks ; the 
rich shoots of quartz are generally short and the reefs narrow. 

The White Range Gold-field in the MacDonnell Ranges was discovered in 
1897 in a series of rocks consisting essentially of shattered quartzite, believed 
to be of pre-Cambrian age. The beds have a low dip of from 10 to 30 degrees. 
There are, however, no defined lodes, but the auriferous quartz is more or 
less confined to the fissures and cracks, which traverse the quartzites at all 
angles and in all directions. When viewed broadly the general trend of the 
ore bodies is east and west. The White Range field is remarkable for the 
extraordinary number of its auriferous deposits. 

North of Arltunga is the mica field of the Hart Range. The country 
rock consists of granite and granitic gneiss with basic dykes ; the whole 
being traversed by coarse pegmatite veins and huge masses of pure quartz, 
which together form the mica-bearing lodes. The mica-bearing dykes, 
which are numerous and extend over a large area, are extremely irregular 
both in shape and size. From one of these dykes, near Mount Palmer, 
a large block of mica, measuring 6 by 5 by 4 feet and weighing nearly 7 cwt., 
was obtained. Some of these mica-bearing pegmatites, which are believed 
to be of pre-Cambrian age, contain tourmaline, beryl, and garnets. 

7. South Australia. 

^ The State of South Australia is estimated to cover an area of 380,070 
square miles. 

Since the year 1842, when the first copper mine was discovered atKapunda, 
the State has turned out mineral products, the total value of which up to the 
end of 1912, amounts to £30,427,000. Of this, over £27,000,000 represents 
the value of the copper as officially recorded. 

The principal mineral products of greatest importance in South Australia, 
arranged in order of value, at the end of 1912, are copper (£27,747,000), 
gold (£921,000), salt, (£815,000), and silver and lead (£338,554). 

Copper mining is the most important industry, and the yield of copper 
far outstrips that of any other single State in the Commonwealth. 



Mining Fields of Australia. 459 

The mineral fields of South Australia cover a large a^ea of country, which 
extends continuously from Kangaroo Island as far north as latitude 30 degrees. 
Isolated areas are met with in the Musgrave, Mann, and Tomkinson Eanges, 
in the north-west corner of the State, along the border separating South 
Australia from the Northern Territory. These areas coincide more or less 
with those occupied by the metalliferous rocks of Archsexn, pre-Cambrian, 
and Cambrian age. These rocks consist of granite, gneiss, hornblende, 
mica, and quartz schists, sandstones, conglomerates, and crystalline lime- 
stone intersected by granite, diorite, gabbro, porphpy, etc. 

So far there does not appear to have been any specially noteworthy zonal 
arrangement of the mineral deposits detected, which is only possible after an 
exhaustive and systematic geological survey (now in progress) has been 
carried out. 

Deposits of copper ore are found distributed over a very large portion 
of the State, though active mining operations, on a serious scale, have been 
confined to one or two localities. 

Yorke's Peninsula, between Spencer's and St. Vincent's Gulf, contain a 
large area of copper country, which includes the two great mines of Moonta 
and Wallaroo, which have for over half a century been such a valuable State 
asset, having produced between them £12,500,000 of copper. 

The Wallaroo system of lodes are nearly vertical, having an average strike 
from 10 to 20 degrees south of east and vary in width from a few inches up to 
14 feet. The country rock is micaceous schist, and the ore it contains is 
chiefly chalcopyrite. 

The Moonta Copper lode traverses a quartz-felspar porphpy, the relation 
of which to the surrounding schistose rocks is not quite clear. The ore channel 
contains several ore bodies, which vary in width from a few inches up to 20 
feet, and have been worked to a depth of over 2,000 feet below the surface. 
The predominant copper ore is chalcopyrite. 

The Blinman Copper lode is another which has been an important pro- 
ducer. The lode is nearly 100 feet in thickness and over 350 feet in length. 
The ore-bearing belt of strata consist of crystalline siliceous limestone, sand- 
stones, shales, and clay slates, disposed in the form of an anticlinal fold 
trending north and south intersected by basic and acidic rocks ; and it is 
in the centre of these disturbed strata that the copper lode occurs. The ore 
is disseminated through the rock in patches, pockets, stringers, and veins, 
running east and west across the grain of the country forming an ore-bearing 
belt of from 20 to 30 feet wide. Some of the cross veins are of considerable 
size, and they are stated to be richer in copper than the main ore-bearing 
strata they penetrate. 

The gold-fields or principal auriferous districts of South Australia are 
fairly numerous, and cover relatively large areas. The production, however, 
has not been, in the aggregate, very great, amounting in value to only £921,000 
since the inception of active mining operations. 

The Barossa Gold-field is made up of rocks believed to be of Lower Silurian 
age, and consisting of micaceous and hornblende schists, associated with 
sandstones and slates, and intersected by both basic and acidic dykes. The 
beds have a uniform strike of north 20 degrees east and an inclination of from 
30 to 70 degrees to the east. There are fairly extensive deep leads, believed 
C.12I54 2g 



460 Federal Handbook. 



to be of Pliocene age ; they consist of sand, clay, and gravel, covered by a 
very ferruginous cement. The payable gold is confined to a layer of from 
1 to 2 feet thick lying directly on the bed rock. 

In the gold-fields of Talunga and Parra Wirra are large areas of older 
gold-drifts of Tertiary age, now represented by outcrops of cement, sand- 
stone, sand, and gravel, forming nearly all the low hills which flank the 
range, forming water parting between the Torrens and the Parra River basins. 
The range is made up of metamorphic rocks, believed to be of Lower Silurian 
age. These beds are intersected by dykes of granite and pegmatite, which 
have some genetic relationship with some of the quartz reefs, for some of 
them (solid white quartz) are seen to pass into granite. The quartz reefs 
mostly contain large quantities of iron pyrites from which it is probable that 
the gold is derived. 

The auriferous portion of the Tarcoola Gold-field extends over an area of 
about 10 miles in an east and west direction. The rocks enclosing the quartz 
reefs consist of quartzite, clay slate, and sandstone, resting upon a mica- 
free granite. The auriferous lodes cross the sediments approximately at 
right angles to the strike, and cut through them more or less vertically ; 
there are in addition another series of ironstone and quartz lodes, trending 
approximately at right angles to these, and conformable to the general strike 
of the sedimentary series and the junction of them and the granite. 

Auriferous lodes also traverse the granite and appear to be of the nature 
of auriferous igneous dykes. 

The salt industry of South Australia is of considerable importance, and 
the principal sources of supply are the salt lakes of the southern portion 
of the Cape Yorke Peninsula. Small quantities of the rare minerals, corundum 
beryl, and tourmaline have been met with in different portions of South 
Australia. 

Carnotite, the radio-active mineral, has been mined at Olary, where the 
ore bodies are pegmatite dykes, believed to be of pre-Cambrian age. 



461 




> OD 

5 

O LU 5 

^ CO J 

1 > o 

H 03 O 



462 



GRAPHS SHEWING VALUES OP^ TOTAL TRADE. 
COMMONWEALTH, 1826 to 


EXPORTS 

1912 


AND IMPORTS 


or 




































/ 




















































/ 






































































































A 




















































r 














































































To A 


?7 




Tr 


VT 


r/ 


f 










., r 




















































w 
















































k 
















































A> 


r 


\ 
















































/ 


<I 


v 












































f 


^V 












































<^ 


J' 


V^ 


/ 










































































































































|g^ 






^ 


































































r" 
































































(• 


















































Al 








































































































r 






























T', 


T/r 


?n 


7^ 


'^ 




















































































































V 
























































































































































Ky 












































r\ 


i 


J^ 


f 














































1 


W 




\J 








































r^f" 


/" 


^\ 




















































































































































>- 














































































1 






































































































J 




















































r 
























1 


- 


TD 


ni 


^ 


<if 
















\ 


/ 




























f 














fT 


1,0 






v. 












































\ 


V 


























— 
























\ 












































1 


f 


■^ \ 












































f" 


r 


V 


J 












































































































































, 






^ 











































i8-20 25 30 3o 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 79 .SO 85 90 95 1900 Oi 10 15 20 

Explanation of Geaphs.— The base of each square represents an interval of five years, and 
the vertical height five million pounds sterling for Imports and Exports, and ten million pounds 
sterHng for Total Trade. The scales for Total Trade and Exports are on the left and that for 
Imports on the right hand side of the graphs. 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 463 

CHAPTER XI. 

MANUFACTURES, INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL 
DEVELOPMENT OF AUSTRALIA. 

By Gerald Lightfoot, M.A., Barrister-at-Law. 

SYNOPSIS. 

1. Historical Survey. ' 4. Manttfacturing Industries. 

2. Commonwealth Commercial and 5. Trade and Commerce. 

Industrial Legislation. 6. Trade between United Kingdom 

3. Legislative Regulation of Wages and Australia. 

AND Conditions of Labour. 7. Shipping. 

(a) Wages Boards and Arbitration 8. Railways. 

Courts. 
(6) Factory and Shop Acts. 

1. Historical Survey. 

Though Australia cannot yet be considered a manufacturing country, 
recent years have witnessed a remarkable development in many branches 
of manufacturing industry, so that the total value of production from that 
branch of industr}^ is now more than one-quarter of the whole value of the 
production of the Commonwealth. The estimated value of the total produc- 
tion from all sources has increased from £46,700,000 (or nearly £28 per 
inhabitant), in 1871, to £188,745,000 (or over £42 per inhabitant) in 1911. 
and the value of production per inhabitant now exceeds that of any other 
country for which records are available. The estimated value of the various 
elements included in the total production in 1911 is as follows : — 

Estimated Value of Commonwealth Production, 1911. 

£ 

Agriculture . . . . . . 38,774,000 

Pastoral Industry . . . . . . 50,72.5,000 

Dairying, and Poultry Farming . . 19,107,000 

Forest and Fisheries . . . . 5,728,000 

Mining .. .. .. .. 23,480,000 

Manufacturing . . . . . . 50,931,000 



Total .. .. .. £188,745,000 



From this it will be seen that the Commonwealth is rapidly becoming an 
industrial, as well as a pastoral and agricultural, nation. Moreover, the 
people of Australia, recognising the altered conditions of industrial life and 
the world-wide change in economic and social conditions, have gone further 
than other countries in their attempt to regulate the forces which govern 
the relations between employer and employe, and both Federal and State 
Parliaments have devised legislation of a novel and interesting type. In 
this way have arisen the Wages Board and Conciliation and Arbitration 
Court systems (which will be referred to later), the minimum wage under the 
Factory Acts and the legalized eight-hours day, the early closing and holiday 
regulations, and other measures directed to regulate the development of 
industrial conditions. 

2 G 2 



^64 Federal Handbook. 



Prior to the discovery of gold in 1851 there appeared to be but little pros- 
pect of any extensive development of manufactures in Australia, practically 
the whole of the occupied parts of the continent being given over to pastoral 
purposes. Agriculture was almost entirely subsidiary to sheep and cattle 
raising, and was confined to supplying the wants of the small number of persons 
scattered round the coastal fringe, which then comprised practically the whole 
of the settled part of the continent. The distance of Australia from the 
world's markets, the sparseness of its population, and the consequent absence 
of any considerable local market militated in the early days of settlement 
against any rapid increase in agriculture, while the progress of the pastoral 
industry, on the other hand, was facilitated by the ease with which it was 
carried on, by the suitability of the country, and by the fact that the valuable 
nature of the products, despite the heavy freightage costs, still left a sufficient 
margin to compete successfully in the world's markets with other wool-growing 
countries. 

Under these conditions the development of manufacturing industries 
naturally made but slow progress. The settlements were dependent on 
outside sources for the supply of the greater part of their food stuffs and for 
all manufactured commodities, and consequently the comparative isolation 
of the country gradually resulted in the establishment of factories for the 
supply of purely local needs. 

As late as the year 1848 the number of industrial establishments in Aus- 
tralia did not exceed 479, while the number of persons employed was under 
2,000. The most numerous establishments of any one class were flour mills, 
oi which there were in 1848 about 220. The next in number were establish- 
ments for the treatment of skins and hides, followed in the order named by 
breweries and distilleries, soap and candle works, iron foundries, brick works 
and potteries, and boat building. Of the 479 establishments, 313 were in 
New South Wales, including 41 in the Port Phillip District (now Victoria), 
99 in Tasmania, and 67 in South Australia.* As the average number of 
employes in these establishments was less than five, it will be understood 
that many of them were only on a very small scale and would not come within 
the present statistical definition of a factory in Australia, viz., " any 
factory, workshop, or mill where four or more persons are employed or power 
is used." 

The principal exports from Australia at this period were wool, tallow, 
oil, skins, and salt beef, trade being confined almost wholly to the United 
Kingdom. The quantity of wool exported to that country increased from 
less than 13 million lbs. in 1841 to nearly 4U million lbs. in 1850. Whale 
fishing, although now almost unknown in Australian waters, at one time 
held an important place among the industries of the country. Whaling 
stations were established at different places, but by the middle of the 
nineteenth century the industry was declining in southern waters generally, 
and Australian shipping came to be engaged more exclusively in the trans- 
port trade. In 1850 the value of the exports of sperm oil exceeded £65,000, 
while the value of tallow exported was £312,000. In the year 1844 copper 
had been found in South Australia, and in the following year the famous 

• In addition there were a few establishments in the Moreton Bay district (now Queensland) and 
Western Australia, but no information in regard thereto has been recorded. 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., op Australia. 465 

Burra Burra mine was discovered. By the year 1850 the exports of copper, 
and ore from Adelaide reached over £275,000. The adoption of improved 
methods of agricultmre soon brought about a rapid extension in the 
cultivation of wheat, and flour soon became an important item of export, 
especially from South Australia and Tasmania, the total value exported 
in 1850 exceeding £75,000. The total exports of domestic produce in 1850 
from each division of Australia were approximately as follows : — 

Export of Domestic Produce, 1850. 

£ 

New South Wales (including Moreton Bay District*) 1,159,000 

Port Phillip District (now Victoria) . . 1,022,000 

South Australia . . . . 571,000 

Western Australia .. 20 000 

Tasmania . . . . . . . . 558,000 



Total .. .. .. .. £3,340,000 



The discovery of gold in large quantities in 1851 completely changed the 
economic aspect in Australia, and effected a revolution in all industrial 
relations. As soon as the gold rush set in many of the towns were practically 
depleted of their male adult population ; and thousands of enterprising men 
capable of adapting themselves to novel conditions of life, as well as many 
others, were attracted to the country in the hope of acquiring fortunes* 
From 1850 to 1855 the population increased from 405,000 to 793,000, that 
is to say, it was nearly doubled. The eight or nine years during which the 
gold fever raged exercised an enormous effect on the economic conditions 
of the working classes ; for had the gold rush not occurred, it is not improbable 
that, with respect to industrial development as well as to the standards and 
conditions of living and the rates of remuneration of labour, the conditions 
existing prior to 1850 would have long remained with but little change. 
Industrial and commercial development would doubtless have followed in 
the wake of the pastoral and agricultural industries as time went on, but 
the opening of the gold-fields had marked effects on the evolution of manu- 
facturing industries in Australia. The first effect of the gold rush was, it 
is true, disastrous to manufacturing and other industries. The supply 
of labour in most occupations was exhausted, and many branches of industry 
came to a standstill. There was, however, a rapid change. Many men, 
of various trades and occupations, who were drawn to the country by the 
prospect of rapidly making a fortune, either not meeting with the early 
success hoped for, or recognising their unfitness for the somewhat strenuous 
life on the goldie'ds, decided to settle down in the new country and 
pursue less precarious, but in many cases more remunerative, callings, 
while at a later stage the depletion of the richer alluvial deposits, and the 
consequent decline in the activity of the gold-fields, threw many immigrants, 
whose early lives had been passed in English cities, out of employment. 
The surplus of labour thus engendered accumulated in a few of the larger 
towns in Australia, establishing incipient artisan communities, and this no 
doubt inten.sified the early impulses towards industrial employment. The 
manufactories, therefore, owed their revival and subsequent development 

• Now CjURLtisland. 



466 Federal Handbook. 



to the population attracted to the country by the gold discoveries. The 
permanent effect of the latter on the commerce of Australia may be seen 
in the trade returns. In 1850 the total value of the overseas trade was 
£5,697,000 ; by 1860 it had increased to £36,617,000 ; and thereafter the 
figures show an almost continuous increase. 

The early sixties may be regarded as a transition period in the industrial 
development of Australia. The country was recovering from the excitement 
and restlessness of the gold fever, and was settling down to a more prosaic 
period of sterner conditions and slower, but more stable, growth. The 
renewal of the attention to agriculture was general, and the acreage under 
crop rapidly increased, especially in Victoria, which had benefited most by the 
gold discoveries, and was now the chief financial centre, and, in all other 
important respects, the leading colony of Australia. During the following 
years steady progress was made in general development and in agx-icultural 
settlement, and the industrial and social conditions now obtaining were 
gradually evolved. Although there was a considerable fall in the gold 
returns, there was a steady increase in the quantity of wool and other 
pastoral produce exported. Victoria held the first place in regard to the value 
of trade, both of imports and exports, though towards the year 1870 its 
advantage over the mother State was considerably reduced. 

Up to the middle of the nineteenth century free-trade was the established 
policy throughout Australia. This suited the economic needs of the 
country, and, though there was nothing in the mere discovery of gold and the 
consequent rush of immigrants to change the economic motive for a low 
tariff, a combination of influences, within a decade, due to the gold discoveries, 
made Victoria adopt a protective tariff. Licence-fees for mining on Crown 
land and an export duty on gold had been imposed. The former had caused 
an armed revolt at Ballarat, while the latter made the representatives of 
the mining districts in the local Parliament favour higher import duties, 
in order that the export duty on gold might be removed without diminishing 
the revenues. Both these matters constituted grievances which made the 
miners hostile to the pastoralist Government then in power and to all its 
proposals. At the same time the decline in the activity of the gold-fields 
resulted in the accumulation in a few of the larger towns of a surplus of 
workers, who were in favour of a protectionist policy and in general sympathy 
with the miners against what was considered to be a land-holding plutocracy. 
This led to a severe struggle in commercial, manufacturing, agricultural, 
pastoral, and political circles, and eventually caused a political crisis. A 
general election in 1865 resulted in a victory for the protectionists, and in the 
following year the first Tariff Act of a protective character was passed. The 
rates of duty were considerably increased in 1877 and afterwards, reaching 
their highest in 1892. Four years later a few reductions were made, and 
soon afterwards the local colonial tariff was superseded by the national 
Commonwealth Customs Act. 

While Victoria was pursuing a protectionist policy. New South Wales 
continued to adhere to free-trade. In 1864 the Government in power in the 
latter colony was defeated in an attempt to increase the Customs duties 
in order to meet a deficit in the revenue, but on appeal to the country a 
Parliament was elected which passed a Tariff Act levying 5 per cent, od 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 467 



valorem, on imports. In 1873 this Tariff was repealed, but ten years later 
a protectionist party had grown up in New South Wales, and an Act imposing 
higher duties was passed. The latter Act was repealed by the free-traders 
in 1887, and from that time several Tariffs were framed, some on free-trade 
lines, and some providing for slight protectionist duties, until the inauguration 
of the Commonwealth removed the question from the local Parliament. 

It is probable that New South Wales favoured free-trade for the reason 
that it was thought that Sydney would benefit by being the only large dis- 
tributing centre in Australia unhampered by Tariff restrictions, and also that, 
since she possessed the only important coal-fields in the country, protective 
legislation to encourage the growth of local industries was unnecessary. 
In these expectations the people of New South Wales were, however, to some 
extent, disappointed, since Melbourne became for a time the leading financial 
and industrial centre of Australia. The relatively greater prosperity of 
Victoria, until the crisis of 1893, was probably the reason for the slow rise 
of a comparatively mild protectionist party in New South Wales. 

In the other colonies the measures adopted in regard to Customs duties 
were also dissimilar. While some of the Tariffs were manifestly framed on 
free-trade lines, others indicate clearly the growth of protection and a desire 
to encourage local manufacture. The Constitution Acts empowered the 
colonies to impose any duties they saw fit, provided that they were not 
preferential, even upon imports from England. At various times conferences 
were held to further inter-colonial trade agreements, but the diverse fiscal 
policies formed additional obstacles to the framing of any Customs union. 
At a conference in 1871 it was vainly attempted to establish a commercial 
union of all the Australian colonies, with proportionate distribution of the 
Customs revenue, and the British Government was asked to sanction recipro- 
cal conventions to help inter-colonial trade. Two years later another con- 
ference demanded " inter-colonial commercial reciprocity," with the result 
that in 1873 the Australian Colonial Duties Act was passed permitting 
differential duties among the colonies, but excluding Great Britain from 
such arrangements. By reason, however, mainly of commercial rivalry, 
diversity in policy and railway competition, the colonies did not avail them- 
selves of the powers thus conferred, and in the eighties further conventions 
were held in the hope of forming a Customs union ; but it is stated that the 
opposition of Victoria to entrusting to a commission power to frame a tariff 
" recognising fairly the interests and special circumstances of each colony " 
again defeated this project. It was but slowly, therefore, as transport and 
communication were developed and as intercourse between the colonies 
became more common, that the people receded from their policy of mutual 
trade isolation. Finally, with a growth of a spirit of nationality among 
Australians, the sentiment in favour of Federation made possible a general 
solution of the inter-colonial Tariff question, together with other problems 
of union. 

2. Commonwealth Commercial and Industrial Legislation. 

In addition to the Customs Act providing for the organization and adminis- 
tration of the Federal Customs and the Tariff Acts under which protective 
rates of duty have been established, a number of other Acts relating to trade 
and commerce and the regulation of industries have been passed by the 



468 Federal Handbook. 



Commonwealth Parliament. Among these may be mentioned the Sea 
Carriage oj Goods Act 190i, the Secret Commissions Act 1905, the Commerce 
{Trade Descriptions) Act 1905, the Bounties Act 1907, the Manufactures 
Encouragement Act 1903, the Australian Industries Preservation Acts 1906 
to 1910, the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Acts 1904 to 1911, 
and the Inter-State Commission Act 1912. 

Probably the most interesting of these Acts are those dealing with what 
is known as the " new protection," a term which, though novel, is firmly 
established in Australian economic discussions. It expresses the idea that 
the protection which the manufacturer receives should be made conditional 
upon his paying what is considered a fair wage to his employes and providing 
labour conditions otherwise satisfactory. In the view of those who supported 
this policy it was considered that the protective tariff might become a shield 
for trusts and combines, which might reap the benefit of monopoly prices, 
while keeping the " real " wages of workmen at a low level. The next step 
was, therefore, to make legislative provision for the repression of monopolies, 
and the prevention of " dumping," and then to ensure that a protected 
manufacturer should charge a reasonable price for the products of his factory, 
and also that the benefits of a protective duty should not be monopolized 
by the employer, but shared with his workmen. The former of these objects, 
viz., the repression of monopolies and prevention of " dumping," is attempted 
in the provisions of the Australian Industries Preservation Act 1906 to 1910 ; 
the latter, viz., the " new protection," it was sought to attain by means of 
the Excise Tariff Act 1906. 

The Industries Preservation Acts have two main objects, viz., (i.) the 
repression of trusts and other combinations in restraint of trade ; and (ii.) the 
prevention of " dumping." In regard to the former matter the clauses 
for the repression of monopolies may be summarized thus : — (a) Any indi- 
vidual, either as principal or agent, or any company that enters into a contract 
in restraint of, or with intent to restrain trade or commerce, or to destroy 
or injure by means of unfair competition any desirable Australian industry, 
is liable to a penalty of £500. {h) Any such person who monopolizes or 
attempts or combines to monopolize any part of the trade or commerce 
with other countries or among the States is liable to a similar penalty, 
(c) Any person who, in relation to such trade or commerce, refuses either 
absolutely or except upon disadvantageous conditions to sell or supply 
goods or service to any other person for the reason that the latter person 
deals with others who are not members of a commercial trust is also liable 
to a penalty of £500. Two attempts to penalize firms, who were supposed 
to have disregarded the provisions of the original Act had failed, the High 
Court declaring that certain sections of that Act were ultra vires. The 
main difficulty was that in the prosecution of any offending trader or cor- 
poration it was necessary (under the original Act) to prove " intent to restrain 
trade to the detriment of the public." Such proof was found to be almost 
unattainable, and the amending Act of 1910 provided in effect that the 
entering into any combination, for what might appear restraint, should be 
'prima jade proof of the intent. 

No proceedings have, however, been instituted up to the present time 
under the Act as amended. In the other part of the Act, which aims at the 
prevention of " dumping " it is provided that if the Comptroller-General 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 469 

of Customs has reason to believe that " any person is importing into 

Australia goods with intent to destroy or injure any Australian 

industry by their sale within the Commonwealth in unfair competition 
with Australian goods," he can refer the matter to a Justice of the High 
Court ; and if that official, guided " by good conscience and the merits of 
the case without regard to legal forms and technicalities " decides that the 
goods are being imported with such intent, their importation shall be pro- 
hibited. No proceedings have been taken under this part of the Act, and 
in spite of the elaborate definitions of " unfair competition " in six sub- 
sections of the Act, it would be a difficult task to prove, even in the absence 
of " legal forms and technicalities," that the intent of the importer was to 
destroy or injure any Australian industry. 

Although the primary object of the Australian Industries Preservation 
Acts was the restraint of foreign trusts, they apply equally to local trusts 
within the Commonwealth. By the Customs To,rifi 1906, increased duties 
were imposed upon certain classes of agricultural machinery, notally the 
" stripper-harvester," a machine invented in Australia, which has, to a great 
extent, replaced the " reaper and binder and thrashing machine " in the 
harvesting of wheat. By the same Act it was declared that the machines 
scheduled should not be sold at a higher cash price than was thereby fixed, 
and that if that price should be exceeded, the Commonwealth Executive 
should have power, by reducing the Customs duties imposed by the Act, 
to withdraw the Tariff protection. 

By another Act of the same year (the Excise Tariff Act 1906) an excise 
of one-half the duty payable upon imported agricultural machinery was 
imposed upon similar machinery manufactured in Australia. But it was 
declared that the latter should be exempt from excise if the manufacturer 
thereof complied with the following provision, namely, that the goods be 
manufactured under such conditions as might be declared by resolution 
of both Houses of Parliament to be fair and reasonable, or as might be 
approved by the President of the Commonwealth Arbitration Court. Another 
Act carried into effect similar provisions in regard to distilleries, and it was 
proposed to apply the system of removable excise duties to a large number 
of other protected industries. 

In Victoria, " this whole controversial problem with its gi-ave social and 
economic bearings " (to quote the words of the President of the Court) was 
discussed in a lengthy case upon the application for exemption by Victorian 
manufacturers, now widely known as the " Harvester Case," and in the 
report of that case may be found the legal interpretation of the Acts under 
consideration. The exemptions claimed were refused, and the court after 
discussing the meaning of the words " fair and reasonable " defined them 
by laying down what it considered to be a scale of fair and reasonable wages. 

The High Court has pronounced that the legislation under these Excise 
Acts is unconstitutional as being an extension of Federal action beyond the 
powers granted, and a usurpation of the powers reserved to the States. It 
may be noted that the rejected measures were enacted with the consent 
of all parties in Parliament, having been placed upon the Statute Book 
whilst the Liberal party was in power, the Labour representatives strongly 
supporting the proposals. This legislation, although now ineffective, remains 
on the Statute Book as the pioneer effort of any Parliament to apjiortion 



470 Federal Handbook. 



the benefits of a protective system between employers and employed, and 
to prevent advantage being taken of the Tariff to raise prices unduly. 

The provisions of these and the Arbitration and Wages Board Acts may 
be regarded as indicating the general trend of a large body of opinion in 
Australia in regard to the State regulation of private enterprise. While there 
is a considerable section of socialistic thought which aims at the progressive 
extension of the sphere of public ownership, the more conservative element 
advocates the development of legal and administrative control. In view, 
however, of the limitations of the Federal Constitution Act and of the world- 
wide concentration of capitalism and development of monopolies and trusts, 
the socialist reformer is faced with the necessity of dealing with the question 
of the public regulation of private indastries on lines which are immediately 
practicable. Hence both parties are interested in the development of legis- 
lation on the lines indicated. While the field of Commonwealth regulation 
of trade, commerce, and industrial matters is limited by the Constitution 
Act, the exercise of the functions of the Commonwealth in this direction 
has suffered from the absence of any administrative body entrusted with 
adequate powers of investigation and control. This need, inter alia, the 
Inter-State Commission is designed to supply. 

This bodv, which was appointed in August, 1913, is constituted as a 
Court of Record in the exercise of its judicial powers of adjudication, and is 
empowered to investigate matters affecting production, trade, industries, 
manufactures, external markets, tariffs, prices, profits, wages, industrial 
conditions, foreign shipping, or export bounties, river questions and other 
matters referred by Parliament. The Commission may act either on the 
complaint of any individual or on its own initiative. It may grant such 
relief as it deems proper, award damages, issue injunctions, fix penalties, 
and prescribe future action as by naming a maximum or minimum rate for 
certain services. It is also vested with extensive powers in regard to the 
regulation of Inter-State commerce. No appeal lies from the Commission, 
except to the High Court on questions of law. It may thus be seen 
that the powers and functions of the Commission are both extensive and 
important. The Commission is now engaged as a tariff board and is investi- 
gating the need for, and incidence of, protective duties. It is stated that 
it was the intention of the Labour party, by whom the Act creating the 
Commission was passed, that it should be used to make inquiries regarding 
industries alleged to be the subject of monopolies or combines, with a view 
either to the nationalization of such industries or to fixing the prices to be 
charged for the commodities produced. The work and operations of the 
Commission will be watched with interest, since time alone can prove the 
value of what must now be regarded as an economic and social experiment. 

By the Commerce {Trade Descriptions) Act 1905, power is given to compel 
the placing of a proper description on packages of imports or exports of 
certain prescribed goods. The operation of the Act is restricted to the 
following classes of goods : — {a) Articles used for food or drink by man, or 
used in the manufacture or preparation of articles used for food or drink 
by man ; or [h) medicines or medicinal preparations for internal or external 
use ; or (c) manures ; or {d) apparel (including boots and shoes), and the 
materials from which such apparel is manufactured ; or (e) jewellery ; or 
{j) seeds and plants. 



Mandfactubes, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 471 

The Bounties Act 1907, the Manufactures Encouragement Act 1908, and the 
Shale Oil Bounties Act 1910 make provision for the encouragement of certain 
Australian industries by the payment to producers of moneys allotted by the 
Acts upon the production of the commodities specified. The Acts also pro- 
vide for the refusal or reduction of a bounty, if the production of a commodity 
is not accompanied by the payment to the workers employed in that pro- 
duction of a fair and reasonable rate of wage. Reference to the Common- 
wealth Conciliation and Arbitration Act is made in a later part of this 
article. 

3. Legislative Regulation of Wages and Conditions of Labour. 
(a) Wages Boards and Arbitration Courts. 

Two systems, based upon different principles, have been adopted in Aus- 
tralia for the regulation of wages and general terms of contracts of employ- 
ment. A " Wages Board " system exists in Victoria and Tasmania, and 
an Industrial Arbitration Court in Western Australia. In New South Wales, 
Queensland, and South Australia combinations of the two systems have 
now been evolved, Industrial or Wages Boards, as well as Industrial Courts, 
being instituted. There is also the Arbitration Court of the Commonwealth, 
which has power, however, to deal only with disputes extending beyond 
the limits of a single State. 

The fundamental difference in principle between the Wages Board and the 
Arbitration Court systems is that the Wages Board, once established, itself 
takes the initiative, and immediately sets to work, without waiting for a dis- 
pute, to frame wages and conditions of employment for the trade under 
review, whereas under the Arbitration Court system a tribunal cannot 
itself initiate proceedings, but must wait until a dispute comes within 
its official cognisance. Under the Wages Board system, moreover, each 
trade or industry has its own Board, whereas a single Arbitration Court 
would ordinarily deal with all trades within a district. Another important 
difference lies in the nature of the tribunals, the Wages Board consisting 
of persons representing the employers and employes respectively, with a 
nominated or independent chairman, while the Arbitration Court consists 
of one member only — a Judge of the Supreme or High Court — -who may, 
however, be assisted by assessors. Again, it may be observed that under 
the Arbitration Court system, anything in the nature of a strike or lock-out 
is expressly forbidden under penalty, provision being made for conciliation 
in matters under dispute by reference to the Court, by means of compulsory 
conferences and by the registration of industrial agreements. No provisions 
for the settlement of disputes exist under the Wages Board system.* It should 

* In the Tasinanian Act, however, clauses have been inserted making it a penal offence to take part, 
or assist, in a strike or lock-out. 

t Information reeardinc the history and working of various Acts in Australia providinp for the legis- 
lative retinlation of wages, etc.. may bo found in the following reports : — -Report of Royal Commission 
on Working of Compulsory Concilijition and Arliitration Laws, 1901 (Sydney. Government Printer) ; 
Report of Royal Commission on I'actoriis and Shops l.iiw in Victoria, li)()2-:5 (Melbourne, Government 
Printer); Report to Secretary of State for the Home IJcp.utmont on the Wages Hoards and Industrial 
Conciliation and -Arbitration Acts of Australia and New Zealand, by Krnest Aves, 19U8 (London, Darling 
and Son, r<l. 4167) ; Strikes and Lock-outs — Memoranda by Hoard of Trade, 1912 (London, D.irling and 
Son, f'<l. 01)81) ; IntiTim and I'inal l{ri)Orts of tlu' Royal Commission on Industrial Arbitration in Xcw 
Soutli Walls. 101:;; 'Die Xcw South Wales Industiial Gazi'tti' (Sydrii>y, (iovrrnment Printer); The Indus- 
trial .Vrbitratlon Itiports and Records, New South Walis (Syilru y, (lovci iinicnt Printer) ; Victoria, .\nnual 
Reports of (Jhief Inspi'ctor of Factories, Workrooms, and Sho|is (.Melbourne, Government Printer); 
Queensland, Annual Reports of the Director of Labour and Chief Inspector of Factories and Shoi)s (Bris- 
bane, Government Printer) ; South Australia, Annu.'iJ Reports of Chief Inspectors of Factories (.\delai<lc. 
Government Printer) ; We.^tirn .Australia, Annu.-il Reports of Proeeedhigs under the Industri.il Conciliation 
and .\rbitr;ition Act. .-ind Rejiorts of Proceedings before thi- P.o.ird-^ of Conciliation and Court of .Arbitration 
(Perth, Government Printer); Tasmania, Reports of tlie Chief Inspector of Factories (llobart, tioveru- 
ment Printer) ; Commonwealth Arbitration Reports, Vols. 1. to \'. (Melbourne, Government Printer). 



472 Federal Handbook. 

be observed, however, tliat although the Arbitration Court attacks the 
problem at the other end, aiming primarily at the prevention of strikes, 
the chief work of the Court is not, perhaps, so much concerned with the 
maintenance of industrial peace as with the settlement of certain definite 
minimum conditions of employment. 

The Wages Board system was introduced in Victoria by the Factories 
and Shops Act of 1896. t The original Bill applied to three industries only 
(viz., the clothing, furnitui'e, and breadmaking or baking trades), in 
which conditions of labour were notoriously bad and sweating prevalent. 
The effect of these Boards in improving conditions of labour soon became 
apparent, and the scope of the Act was consequently extended in 1900, and 
again in 1907, 1910, and 1912, and at the present time a Wages Board can 
be appointed for any process, trade, business, or occupation in the State. 
A Court of Industrial Appeals, consisting of a Supreme Court Judge, with 
power to call in two assessors, has been established to act as a Court of Appeal 
from the determinations of Wages Boards. Twelve appeals have been 
heard and in ten of these the decisions of the Boards were varied. Up to 
the end of August, 1913, no fewer than 131 Boards had been authorized, 
the determinations gazetted affecting upwards of 150,000 persons. 

In Victoria a Wages Board is appointed on resolution by both Houses of 
Parliament, one-half of the members being representatives of employers and 
one-half of employes. The names of members are fi.rst submitted by persons 
interested, and Ihen appointed by the Governor in Council on the nomina- 
tion of the Minister. The chairman is nominated by the members, but if 
they do not agree to a chairman, he is appointed by the Governor in Council 
on the recommendation of the Minister. The times of meeting, the mode of 
carrying on business, and all procedure are entirely in the hands of the Board, 
whose powers are defined in the Factories Acts. The result of the labours of a 
Board is called a " Determination," and each item of such determination 
must be carried by a majority of the Board. The chairman is a member of 
the Board. His function is usually confined to conducting the proceedings. 
He does not exercise his vote except in cases where the Board is equally 
divided, when his casting vote determines the question at issue. When a 
determination has been fi.nally made, it must be signed by the chairman, 
and forwarded to the Minister of Labour. The Board fixes a date on which 
the determination should come into force, but this date cannot be within 
30 days of the date upon which a price or rate of pay was last fixed. 
If the Minister is satisfied that the determination is in form, and can be 
enforced, it is duly gazetted. In the event of the Minister considering that 
any determination may cause injury to trade, or injustice in any way what- 
ever, he may suspend same for any period, not exceeding six months, 
and the Board is then required to reconsider the determination. If 
the Board does not make any alteration, and is satisfied that the 
fears are groundless, the suspension may be removed by notice in the 
Gazette. Provision is made by which either employers or employes may 
appeal to the Court of Industrial Appeals against any determination of 
a Board. An appeal may be lodged {a) by a majority of the representa- 
tives of the emjiloyers on the Special Board ; (6) a majority of the 
representatives of employes on the Special Board ; (c) any employer or group 
of employers, who employ not less than 25 per cent, of the total number of 

t See Note on page 471. 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., op Australia. 473 



workers in the trade to be affected ; or, (d) 25 per cent, of the workers in any 
trade. The Court has all the powers of a Board, and may alter or amend 
the determination in any way it thinks fit. The decision of the Court is final 
and cannot be altered by the Board, except with the permission of the Court, 
but the Court may, at any time, review its own decision. The Minister has 
power to refer any determination of a Board to the Court for its consideration, 
if he thinks fit, without appeal by either employer or employe. The decision 
of the Court is gazetted in the same way as the determination of the Board, 
and comes into force at any date the Court may fix. The determinations 
of the Board and the Court are enforced by the Factories and Shops Depart- 
ment, and severe penalties are provided for breaches of determinations. 
No prosecution for any offence against any of the Factories Acts, or for 
any breach of any determination can be brought except through the 
Department. 

In Tasmania a Wages Board system was introduced by the Wages Board 
Act 1910. Amicable settlement of disputes and the adjustment of relations 
between employers and employes, more especially in regard to wages, was 
speedily shown to be a forlorn hope owing to the retention of what is known 
as the " reputable employers " clause. This limited the wages to be deter- 
mined by a Board to those paid at the time the Board was established. It 
was pointed out that this provision had been repealed in Victoria in 1907, 
and in view of the strenuous opposition of the employes to its retention in 
Tasmania, an amending Act was passed in 1911 repealing the clause. The 
appointment of twenty Boards has been authorized, and of these fifteen 
have made determinations. In its general features the system in operation 
in Tasmania closely resembles that of Victoria, but in the former State it 
is a penal offence to take part or assist in a strike or lock-out on account of 
any matter in respect of which a Board has made a determination. 

Since it is not practicable to furnish within the limits of this article any 
comprehensive description of the systems in force in each State, a tabular 
statement showing some of the more important features of the Acts is given 
on pages 471 and 475. 

In New South Wales the Acts in force during the first period during which 
legislative intervention in industrial disputes was attempted, viz., the Trades 
Disputes Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1892, and the Conciliation and 
Arbitration Act 1899, were based on the idea that voluntary conciliation 
would be the most effective instrument in the adjustment of grievances. 
As neither of these Acts compelled either party to a dispute to submit its 
case, they both proved ineffective. In 1901 the Arbitration Court system 
was adopted in the Industrial Arbitration Act of that year. This Act pro- 
vided for the registration of industrial unions and for the making and enforcing 
of industrial agreements. A Court of Arbitration was constituted for the 
hearing and determination of industrial disputes and matters referred to it, 
and tlie jurisdiction, powers, and procedure of that Court were defined. 



474 



Federal Handbook. 



Tribunals for the Regulation of Wages 



Particulars. 
Name of Arts 



Nature of Tribunals 

How Tribunals are 
brought into 
existence 



Scope of Acts 



How a trade is 
brought under 
review 



President or Chair- 
man of Tribunal 



No. of members of 
Tribunal 



How ordinary 

members are ap- 
pointed 



Decisions — How 
enforced 



Duration of de- 
cision 



Appeal against de- 
cision 



If suspension of 
decision po.ssible 
pending appeal 



Can preference to 
unionists be de 
Glared 



Provision against 
strikes and lock- 
outs 



Special provisions 
for Conciliation 



New South Wales. 



Industrial Arbitration Act 
1912 

Court of Industrial Arbitra- 
tion. Industrial Boards 

Industrial Court (Judge) 
constituted by Act. 
Industrial Boards by 
the Minister on recom- 
mendation of Industrial 
Court 

To industrial groups 
named in Schedule to 
Act, and those added 
by Proclamation. In- 
cludes Government ser- 
vants 

Reference by Court or 
Minister, or by applica- 
tion to the Board by 
employers or employes 



Appointed by Minister on 
recommendation of 

Court 



Chairman and two or four 
other members 



Appointed by Minister on 
recommendation of In- 
dustrial Court 



By Registrar, Industrial 
Magistrate and Inspec- 
tors 



For period fixed by Tribu- 
nal, but not more than 
three years 



To Industrial Court 
against decision of 
Boards 



Queensland. 



Yes 



Strikes, penalty £50, and 
preference to unionists 
cancelled. Lock-outs, 
penalty £1,000 



Special commissioner. 

Three ConciUation Com- 
mittees for colliery 
districts. Registered 
agreements 



Factories and Shops Act 
1912 

Court of Industrial Ap- 
peals. Wages Boards 

Court constituted by 
Acts. Wages Boards 
by Governor in Council 
on resolution of Par- 
liament 

To any process, trade, 
business, or occupa- 
tion specified in a 
resolution. Govern- 
ment servants are not 
included 

Usually by petition to 
Minister 



Appointed by Governor 
in Council on nomina- 
tion of Board, or failing 
that on nomination by 
Minister 

Not exceeding eleven 
(including chairman) 



Nominated by Minister. 
But if one-fifth of em- 
ployers or employes 
object, representatives 
are elected by them 

By Factories Depart- 
ment in Courts of 
Petty Sessions 



Until altered by Board 
or Court of Industrial 
Appeals 



To the Court of Indus- 
trial Appeals 



Yes ; for not more than 
twelve months 



Industrial Peace Act 1912 



Industrial Court. Indus- 
trial Boards 

Industrial Court consti- 
tuted by the Act. In- 
dustrial Boards by 
Governor in Council 
on recommendation of 
Court 

To callings specified in 
Schedule to Act, and 
to those added by 
Governor in Council 



By petitions and repre- 
sentations to Indus- 
trial Registrar 



Any person elected by 
Board. If none elec- 
ted, appointment is by 
the Governor in Council 
on recommendation of 
Court 

Not less than five nor 
more than thirteen 
(including chairman) 



By employers and em- 
ployes respectively 



By Inspectors of Fac- 
tories and Shops, De- 
partment of Labour 



Twelve months and there- 
after, until altered by 
Board or Court 



To Industrial Court 



Yes ; for not more than 
three months 



None 



Strikes, association£l ,000 ; 
individual £50; lock-outs 
£1,000, unless notice of 
intention given to Regis- 
trar and secret ballot 
taken in favour. In the 
case of public utilities 
compulsory Conference 
also must have proved 
abortive 

Compulsory Conference 
Registered agreements 



* The operation of the Commonwealth Act is limited by the Constitution to conciliation and arbitration 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia, 



475 



IN Trades in Australia, 1913. 



South Australia. 


Western Australia. 


Tasmania. 


Commonwealth. * 


The Factories Acts 1907, 


Industrial Arbitration Act 


Wages Boards Acts 


Conciliation and Arbi- 


1908, and 1910. Indtis- 


1912 


1910 and 1911 


tration Act 1904-11 


trial Arbitration Art 1912 








Industrial Court. Wages 


Arbitration Court 


Wages Boards 


Court of Conciliation 


Boards 






and Arbitration 


Court constituted by Act 


Constituted by the Act . . 


For the clothing 


Court constituted by 


of 1912. Wages Boards 




trade, by the Act ; 


the Act 


by the Governor in 




for other trades. 




Council 




by a resolution 
of Parliament 




To processes, trades, etc., 


All industrial occupa- 


All trades, or groups 


Industrial disputes ex- 


specified in Act, and 


tions 


or parts thereof 


tending beyond limits 


such others as may be 






of anyone State or in 


authorized by Parlia- 






Federal Capital or 


ment 






Northern Territories 


Court — matters or dis- 


Industrial disputes re- 


By application of 


Industrial disputes 


putes submitted by 


ferred by President or 


parties 


either certified by 


Minister, Registrar, 


by an Industrial Union 




Registrar, submit- 


employers, or employes. 


or Association 




ted by organization, 


or by report of Wages 






referred by a State 


Board. Wages Boards 






Industiial authority 


by petitions, etc. 






or by President after 
holding abortive Com- 
pulsory Conference 


Court — President. Wages 


A Judge of the Supreme 


Any person elected 


President 


Board, appointed by 


Court 


by the Board. If 




Governor on nomina- 




none elected, ap- 




tion of Board, or failing 




pointment by the 




nomination a Stipen- 




Governor in Coun- 




diary Magistrate 




cil 




Court, President only. 


Three, including presi- 


Chairman, and not 


President only 


Wages Board, not less 


dent 


less than four nor 




than five nor more 




more than ten 




than eleven (inclusive 








of chairman) 








By Governor on nomina- 


Appointed by Governor, 


By Governor in 


President appointed 


tion of employers and 


President directly, and 


Council on nomi- 


by Governor-General 


employes respectively 


one each on recom- 


nation by em- 


from Just ices of High 




mendation of unions of 


ployers and em- 


Court 




employers and workers 


ployes 






respectively 






By Factories Depart- 


By Arbitration Court on 


By Factories Depart- 


By proceedings insti- 


ment 


complaint of any party 


ment 


tuted by Registrar, 




to the award or Regis- 




or by any organi- 




trar or an Industrial 




zation affected, or a 




Inspector 




member thereof 


Until altered by Board 


For period fixed by Court, 


Until altered by 


For period fixed by 


or by order of Indus- 


not exceeding three 


Board 


award not exceeding 


trial Court 


years, or for one year 
and thenceforward 
from year to year 
until 30 days' notice 
given 




five years 


Industrial Court 


No appeal except against 


To Supreme Court . . 


No appeal. Case may 




imprisonment or a fine 




be stated by Presi- 




exceeding £20 




dent for opinion of 
High Court 


Yes . . 


No suspension. Court 
has power to revise an 
award after the expira- 
tion of twelve months 
from its date 


Yes 


No appeal 


No 


No .. 


No 


Yes ; ordinarily op- 
tional, but mandatory 
if in opinion of Court 
preference is neces- 
sary for maintenance 
of industiial peace or 
welfare of society 


Penalty £500, or im- 


Employer or Industrial 


Organization £500; 


Penalty, £1,000 


prisonment three 


Union, £100 ; other 


individual £20 




months 


cases. £10 






Compulsory Conference. 


Compulsory Conference. 


None 


Compulsory Conference. 


Industiial Court. 


Registered agreements 




Court may tempo- 


Registered agreements 






rarily refer to Con- 
ciliation Coniniitteo. 
Registered agreements 



for the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of anyone State. 



476 Federal Handbook. 



This Act abandoned the principle of conciliation in favour of arbitration, 
the jurisdiction of the Court extending to all industries except domestic 
service, and its awards applying without limitation of area throughout 
the State. Provision was also made for the registration of industrial agree- 
ments. This Act, however, proved unsatisfactory, mainly for the reasons 
that the congestion of business in the Court culminated in industrial unrest 
and that the High Court decided that the Court had no jurisdiction to declare 
the terms of an agreement to be a "common rule," in other words an employer 
on entering into an industrial agreement might bind himself for a specified 
time to pay higher wages than those paid by other employers in the same 
industry. 

In the Industrial Disputes Act 1908 an effort was made to combine the 
relatively simple procedure of Conciliation Boaids with the compulsory powers 
of the Arbitration Court as to enforcement of findings and awards. The 
Boards had power to decide all disputes and to rescind or vary any of their 
awards, and in carrying out these purposes they were empowered to fix 
minimum wages and other conditions of labour. The Board system estab- 
lished by this Act was responsible for the effective operation of some 230 
Boards and the making of 430 awards. The multiplicity of Boards under 
this Act was, however, the cause of considerable overlapping of awards 
and consequent confusion. It was mainly the di6S.culties arising irom this 
confusion which led to a reconsideration of the whole scheme and to the 
passing of the Industrial Arbitration Act 1912, now in force. Under this 
Act it was intended there should eventually be about 150 Boards presided 
over by 28 chairmen, one for each group of industries, and each having 
jurisdiction in a clearly defined industrial area. In addition a Court of 
Industrial Arbitration was established and provision was made for the con- 
stitution in certain raining districts of Conciliation Committees. The organi- 
zation of the Boards under the new Act is based on the principle of craft 
unionism, i.e., all craftsmen in each trade, such as carpenters, engine-drivers, 
painters, and so on, belong to the same union, and are dealt with by the 
same Board. These Boards are judicial tribunals and not round-table con- 
ferences, their powers being wider than those of ordinary wages boards, 
and extending to the determination of any " industrial matter " and to the 
granting of preference of employment to unionists. 

In Queensland, the Wages Boards Acts were repealed in 1912, and replaced 
by the Industrial Peace Act, which contains provisions for the establishment 
of industrial boards and of an Industrial Court, which has both original and 
appellate jurisdiction. In South Australia a combination of the two systems 
has also been evolved by the Factories Act 1907-1910 and the Industrial 
Arbitration Act 1912. In the former State, however, the industrial boards 
have wide powers to determine any industrial matter or dispute, while in 
South Australia the powers of the boards are generally similar to those 
of the wages boards in Victoria and Tasmania, the Industrial Court only 
having power to adjudicate upon industrial disputes. In both States severe 
penalties are provided against strikes and lock-outs, while in South Australia 
" picketing " is also prohibited under penalty. In the latter State refusal 
to offer or accept employment upon the terms of an industrial agreement or 
award is deemed to be a lock-out or strike. 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 477 



Western Australia is the only State in which the Arbitration Court system 
by itself is still in existence. This system, which is also in force under the 
Commomvealth Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904-1911, is framed 
to encourage a system of collective bargaining, to facilitate applications to 
the Court for the prevention of disputes, and assure to the worker such 
benefits as may be derived from organization. It virtually creates the 
industrial union, which is not necessarily identical with the trade union, 
but rather an organization necessary for the administration of the law. 
As in New South Wales, Queensland, and South Australia, so under the 
Commonwealth and Western Australian Acts employers and employes may 
settle disputes and conditions of labour by industrial agreements, which are 
registered and have the force of awards. Failing agreement, disputes are 
settled by reference to the Court. 

As regards the effects of operations under these laws, dispassionate 
observers are generally inclined to believe that the systems of regulating 
wages and hours of labour have in the main been successful. Investigations 
made by the Commonwealth Statistician show that between 1901 and 1912 
nominal wages increased on the average by no less than 24 per cent., and 
though it is true that the increase between these two years was more than 
discounted by the increase in cost of living, this was due largely to the 
phenomenal rise in prices and rents which occurred in 1912. Thus between 
1901 and 1911 effective wages increased by nearly 4 per cent., but between 
1901 and 1912 they decreased by about 1 per cent. While it is true that 
prices and cost of living have not increased in Australia to a greater extent 
than in many other countries, one of the factors which tend to increase prices, 
viz., increase in wages by industrial tribunals, is prevalent to a far greater 
extent in Australia than elsewhere. And though it is not, of course, suggested 
that an increase in wages necessarily results in increased prices, in many 
industries the employers have been able through trade associations and by 
other means to pass on to consumers a considerable proportion of the in- 
creased amount of their wages bills. Hence many of the workers, having 
succeeded in obtaining machinery for the regulation of " nominal " wages, 
are now desirous of extending legislative effort so as to control " effective " 
or " real " wages. The proposals for carrying this idea into effect (either 
by the nationalization of industries subject to operations of monopolies or 
combines or by fixing prices) do not, however, fall within the scope of this 
paper. 

While statistics show, therefore, that there has been a large increase in 
nominal wages, it is equally clear that this increase has been so far effected 
without, on the aggregate, unduly taxing the resources and industries of 
the country. This is shown in various ways by the extension of manufacturing 
industries, by the increasing prosperity of the people, by the large rise in 
savings bank deposits, by the railway and tramway receipts, and by the 
increased consumption of commodities of the nature of luxuries.* Further- 
more, statistics indicate that the relative productive eflB.ciency of labour has 
increased in recent years, f but whether this be due to the human element 

• See Officiixl Year-liook of the Commonwealth of Australia, No. 6, 1912, by G. H. ICnibbs, C.M.G., Ac. 

t See Report No. 2 — Labour and Industrial IJranch of the Commonwealth Bureau of Census and 
Statistics, by G. H. Knibb.s, C..M.G., Ac, p. 69. Taking the relative productive activity for all Industrie.-* 
in 1901 aiba3e(= 1,000), the increase in 1908 was 13-7 percent., and in 1911, 35-5 percent. 

C. 121.54. 2n 



478 Federal Handbook. 



or to improved organization and machinery, or to both these factors, is not 
revealed by the figures available. The fact that the productive activity and 
efficiency in manufacturing industries has increased is borne out by an analysis 
of the manufacturing statistics. Thus while the percentage of wages paid 
on the total value of the output of manufacturing industries increased between 
1908 and 1912 from 19 '8 to 21 -0 per cent.* the percentage available for 
interest, depreciation, other charges, and profit also increased uniformly 
from 16-5 in 1908 to 17-9 in 1911, though it decreased slightly (to 17-2) in 
the following year, showing that in spite of the increased wages the percentage 
available for interest, depreciation, profits, etc., had increased. Available 
evidence indicates, therefore, that the effect of the legislative control of 
wages and conditions of labour has been of benefit both to wage-earners and 
employers, and that the evil effects predicted have not come to pass. The 
complexity of the factors which operate, both those which are purely local 
and others which are traceable to a wider and even world-wide range of 
influences, render the appraisement of the effects of the Acts a matter of 
difficidty. This difficulty would exist even if the Acts had been in force 
for long periods. In some of the States they have, however, been in opera- 
tion for only short periods, so that even the purely economic influences have 
not been fully revealed, while their social and moral aspects remain hidden. 
Rapid changes have occurred in the class of legislation under consideration, 
and have been facilitated by the comparative simplicity of industrial organiza- 
tion as compared with older communities, by the small populations of the 
States, and by the democratic s}Tnpathies of the people. Although the attitude 
of public opinion might be one of the best guides in judging the efficiency 
of the respective Acts and systems in force, beyond the fact that there is a 
widespread determination to adhere to the principle of the minimum wage, 
at any rate for the present, there is no united opinion, or even a united class 
opinion, concerning the relative advantages or efficiency of the various 
Acts. On the contrary, the ebb and flow of opinion, and even sectional 
cleavage in attitude, has been marked. Criticism is, however, directed at 
the details of the systems or at the administration of the Acts, rather than 
at the class of legislation as a whole. The numerous amending Acts, conse- 
quent on weaknesses which have been disclosed, indicate the fluidity of 
opinion which exists, and have strengthened rather than weakened the deter- 
mination to adhere to the legal minimum wage. A great deal of the success 
of the systems lies, no doubt, in the prosperity which has been enjoyed in 
recent years owing largely to the preponderating effect of favorable seasons 
on the important primary industries. Wages have almost invariably been 
increased and the Acts have consequently worked smoothly so far as the 
wage-earners are concerned. It is possible, however, that this tranquillity 
will not be long maintained. It is thought by some that the time is ap- 
proaching when the social conscience of the people will be satisfied and that 
the workers will reach the point of diminishing returns in State regulation. 
In conclusion it may be said that more accurate knowledge and more pro- 
found study than have yet been devoted to the subject will be required to 
furnish definite conclusions as to the economic and social results of these 
industrial laws, and as to the relative merits and demerits of the various 
systems. 

• See Labour BuUetin, No. 3, November, 1913, by G. H. KnibbP, C.M.G 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 479 



(b) Factory and Shop Acts. 

The State Factories Acts do not difier in principle from those in force 
in the United Kingdom, the general object of this class of legislation being 
to fix minimum standard rates of wages and maximum hours of labour, to 
provide for sanitary accommodation, the ventilation and cleansing of premises, 
safeguarding from accident, and the general amelioration of the conditions 
of labour, particularly those of females and children, in factories. 

The first Australian Factories Act was passed in 1873 in Victoria. It 
was entitled " The Supervision of Workrooms and Factories Statute," and 
contained only six sections. Its principal provisions were (a) that any place 
in which not less than ten persons were engaged for hire in manufacturing 
goods should be constituted a factory ; (&) that such factories, as to building, 
sanitation, etc., should be subject to regulations made by the Central Board 
of Health ; and (c) that no female should be employed for more than eight 
hours in any one day without the permission of the Chief Secretary. The 
administration of the Act was entrusted entirely to the local Boards of Health, 
and the system was found to be less efiective than was hoped. The conditions 
which have given rise to trouble in the old world tended to reproduce them- 
selves in the young and growing industries of the States. Factory workers 
had to contend with the absence of secm-ity for a living wage, unsatisfactory 
sanitary surroundings, and unchecked and unscrupulous competition of 
Chinese in certain trades. The advocacy of legislation to control the con- 
ditions of employment became pronounced in Victoria in 1880, and a strike 
of tailoresses in Melbourne in 1882 led to a recognition of the real state of 
afiiirs. As a result of unsatisfactory working under the local governing 
bodies, and on account of agitation of the operatives, a commission was 
appointed in 1883, and reported the necessity of legislation for the regulation 
of factories, and in particular pointed out the fact that men were compelled 
to toil for as many as eighteen hom's and women sixteen hours a day. It 
also showed that the condition of out-workers was very undesirable, and that 
the apprenticeship system was frequently used to obtain labour without 
remuneration, apprentices being dismissed upon asking for payment at the 
end of their time. The Factories and Shops Act 1884, while providing for 
the suppression of many evils in respect of accommodation and lengthy 
hours, did not touch the two last mentioned. It provided for Government 
inspection, and also that six persons should constitute a factory if the 
premises were situated in a city, town, or borough. In 1887 a short amending 
Act was brought in to remedy some defects that were found to exist. Its 
principal provision was that any place in which two or more Chinese were 
engaged should be deemed a factory. In 1893 a further enactment reduced 
the nunaber of persons constituting a factory to four. Another Royal 
Commission sat in 1895, resulting in the Act of 1896, which dealt with matters 
previously untouched, and the system of regulation was carried on by the Act 
of 1900 and the complete codification of the law in 1905, and again in 1912. 

Similar conditions to tho.se which existed in Victoria were found to prevail 
in other States. New South Wales and Queensland first adopted regulative 
measures in 1896, South Australia in 1894, and Western Australia in 1902. 
Tasmania adopted the Victorian Act of 1873 in 1884. Tlie samo remarks 
apply in a general way to the condition of employes in shops. 

2 H 2 



480 Federal Handbook. 



The adoption of the eight houi's system for adult males has generally- 
been the outcome of the representations made by the trade unions. There 
is no legislation to enforce the principle, although there is now a 
general recognition of it. A week of 48 hours is the usual working week. 
The larger unions, however, have lately moved for a 7iet day of eight hours, 
with Saturday half-holiday, no loading of other week days being permitted 
by way of compensating for the Saturday afternoon. Under this scheme 
there are, for five days, equal divisions for periods of labour, recreation, 
and rest, and four hoiu's' work on Saturday, making a working week of 44 
hours. On the establishment of Wages Boards and Arbitration Courts, 
in the States where those institutions exist, the authorities thus created 
generally adopted the principle of 48 hours a week as part of their deter- 
minations and awards wherever it seemed reasonably practicable. In 
some of the larger classes of building trades the hours have been reduced 
to 44 a week, and in some technical and specialist trades a lower maximum 
haa been fixed, such for example, as the type-setting machine operators in 
Victoria, for whom the maximum has been fixed by the Wages Board at 
42 hours weekly. Reasonable provision is made by statute or award for 
work performed outside the scheduled hours. Organizations of employes, 
however, oppose overtime in any industry until all the operatives in that 
industry are working full time. 

In all the States the employment of female labour in factories is now 
regulated by Act of Parliament. The number of working hours is limited 
to 48 per week, overtime being allowed only with the permission of the 
Factory Departments, and even then to a limited extent only. The 
maximum periods of continuous labom* and the intervals of cessation there- 
from are all prescribed under the several Acts. 

The employment of young persons in factories is also regulated in each 
State by Acts of Parliament in a similar manner to the employment of female 
labour. Excepting under special circumstances, children under a certain 
age may not be employed in factories. The minimum age in all the States 
is fourteen, with the exception of South Australia, where it is thirteen 
years, and Victoria, where the minimum for females is fifteen years. 
The general object of the restrictions imposed is to assm'e that a 
proper period shall be devoted to primary education, and that the 
early years of toil shall not exhaust the worker before the attain- 
ment of full growth. It is obvious that the age of apprenticeship in each 
State must be limited by the conditions governing the employment of child 
labour in factories. The early Apprentices Acts in some of the States are 
apparently in conflict on this point with the Factories Acts. The statutes 
limiting the age at which children may begin to work may be regarded as 
applicable by way of preventing too early apprenticeship, so also may those 
directing that education be continued up to a certain age or standard. 
Indentiu-es must be entered into specifying the conditions of the employment. 
Apprenticeships may not exceed seven years in duration, and become 
inoperative at 21 years of age, or in the case of women, on marriage. The 
Arbitration Courts and Wages Boards have power to limit the number of 
apprentices which may be employed in a factory. 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 481 

All the States have statutes containing provisions respecting the houi's 
diuing which shops in large centres may be kept open for business. These 
provisions, in effect, not only limit the horn's dm-ing which shop-hands may 
be employed, but apply also where the shops are tended by the proprietor 
alone, or by himself and family, with, however, certain exceptions. In 
Victoria, for example, shops wherein not more than one assistant, whether 
paid or not, was employed, were permitted to remain open for two hours 
a day longer than other shops of the same class. The object of this was to 
relieve the hardship which existed for such persons as, for example, widows 
who were wholly dependent for a livelihood upon the casual trade of small 
shops. It is, however, reported that little or no benefit accrued from the 
permission. In each of the States the closing time of shops, except those 
specially exempted, is 6 p.m. on four days of the week, 10 p.m. on one day 
(except 9 p.m. in Queensland, South Australia, and Western Australia), 
and 1 p.m. on one day — thus establishing a weekly half-holiday. In Western 
Australia the opening hour is fixed at 8 a.m. In addition to fixing the 
closing hour, the total daily and weekly working hours are delimited in 
the case of women and children. In some States, butchers' shops must be 
closed an hour earlier than other retail establishments, the reason being the 
early hour at which assistants must start to attend to the markets and early 
morning trade. 

Establishments, the opening of which in the evening is presumably 
necessary for public convenience — such as hotels, restaurants, chemists' 
shops, etc. — are required to remain open for longer hours or are permitted 
to do business during hom"s prohibited in other establishments. 

The provisions of the early closing laws differ somewhat in each State, 
but the main objects, namely, the restriction of long hom's of labour, are 
identical throughout. Formerly, in some of the States, there were, and 
there are still in others, provisions making the early closing of a business, 
or the selection of a day for a half-holiday, dependent upon the option of 
the majority of the business people concerned, or upon the local authority. 
The anomalous results of the system whereby shops on one side of the street 
bounding two municipalities were open, when those upon the other side were 
closed, led to the introduction of the compulsory system, whereby the hours 
of business are absolutely fixed by statute. In Queensland, the day of the 
weekly half-holiday is fixed for Saturday. In Victoria also the Satm-day 
half-holiday became compulsory in 1909, and in New South Wales in the 
following year, and there is a strong movement throughout the Common- 
wealth in favour of closing on the afternoon of that day. The hours for 
shops exempted from the general provisions of the Acts are also prescribed, 
and special holidays are provided for carriers. 

The provisions of Factories and Shops Acts and of the Early Closing 
Acts in some of the States are consolidated under a single Act, but in others 
are separate enactments. The chief provisions of the principal Acts for 
registration, administration, record-keeping, etc., and of regulations under 
those Acts, are set out in the following summary : — ■ 

(a) Factories are defined to be places where a certain number of 
persons are employed in making or preparing goods for trade 
or sale, or in which steam or other power is employed, or where 



4:82 Federal Handbook. 



special classes of industry are carried on. In some States 
the employment of a Chinese, in some of any Asiatic, con- 
stitutes the place a factory. 

(b) A Minister of the Crown administers the Act in conjunction with 

a Chief Inspector of Factories. Inspectors visit the factories 
with full powers of entry, examination, and enquiry ; these 
are of both sexes, females being employed in that portion 
of the work where a woman is particularly necessary. Broadly 
speaking, these powers confer upon the Inspector the right to 
enter, inspect, and examine, at all reasonable hours by day and 
night, any factory where he has reason to think anyone is em- 
ployed ; to take a police constable, if necessary, to assist him in 
the execution of his duty ; to require the production of all certifi- 
cates, documents, and records kept by the occupier, in accord- 
ance with the terms of the enactments ; to examine, either 
alone or in the presence of any other person, every person 
whom he finds in a factory ; to make whatever examination 
he deems necessary to ascertain whether the provisions of 
the Act are complied with. ♦ 

(c) Kegistration of factories before occupation is compulsory. Descrip- 

tion of premises and statement of the work to be done must be 
supplied, and a certificate of suitability of premises obtained. 

{d) A record of all employes, giving the names, ages, wages, and work 
of each under a certain age (18, 20, 21, etc.), must be kept 
and filed in the Chief Inspector's office. 

{e) Names and addresses of district inspectors and certifying medical 
practitioners must be posted ; also the working hours, the 
holidays, and the name, etc., of the employer. 

(/) Records of out-work must be kept, containing the names and 
remuneration of workers, and stating the places where the 
work is done. Out-workers are required to register. 

(g) Places in which only the near kin of the occupier are employed 
are generally exempt from registration. 

{h) Meals may be prohibited in workrooms, etc. In some States 
occupiers are required to fm^nish suitable mealrooms. 

(i) The employment in factories of young children is forbidden, 
and medical certificates of fitness are required in the case of 
young persons under a certain age. Special permits, based 
on educational or other qualifications, may be issued for young 
persons of certain ages. 

(j) Guarantees of an employe's good behaviour are void unless made 
with the consent of the Minister. 

(k) Persons in charge of steam engines or boilers must hold certifi- 
cates of service of competency. 

(l) Provision (safeguarding against accident) is made for the fencing 
ofE and proper care of machinery, vats, and other dangerous 
structures. Women and young persons are forbidden to clean 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 483 



machinery in motion or work between fixed and traversing parts 
of self-acting machinery while in motion ; and dangerous trades 
are specified in which a minimum age is fixed. Notice of 
accidents must be sent to the district inspector. (Dangerous 
trades are generally under the administration of Boards of 
Health.) 

(m)|Provision is made for the stamping of furnitm-e, the object being 
to disclose whether it is made by European or Chinese labour. 

(n) Minimum wage provisions are inserted. Premiums to employers 
are forbidden. 

(o) Sanitation and ventilation must be attended to, and fresh drinking 
water supplied. Separate and adequate sanitary conveniences 
for each sex are required. 

(p) Shopkeepers are required to provide proper seating accommodation 
for female employes. (In some States this is the subject of 
special legislation.) 

{q) A dressing-room for females must be provided in factories the 
manufacturing process of which requires a change of dress. 

(r) Adequate protection must be made against fire, and efficient 
fire-escapes provided. 

(s) Wide powers of regulation are granted to the Executive 
and heavy penalties imposed, including a penalty by way of 
compensation to any person injured or the family of any 
person killed through failm'e to fence machinery and other 
dangerous structm^es. 

Other measures for the protection of life, health, and general well-being 
of the worker exist in most of the States. Though in some instances founded 
upon English legislation, many of the provisions are peculiar to Australia. 
Despite experience and continued amendment they have not even yet attained 
to a settled form. Of the Australian States, Victoria originally had the 
most complete system of industrial legislation. Other States gradually 
adopted the Victorian statutes, either en bloc or with amendments suggested 
by local conditions. The results of the legislation referred to must be sought 
in the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories of the several States. Gener- 
ally speaking, the perusal of these reports and of the reports of Eoyal Com- 
missions which have inquired into the working of the Acts, affords satis- 
factory evidence that the Acts have, on the whole, effected their objects. 

4. — Manufacturing Industries. 

The statistics of manufactures in the Commonwealth during recent years 
show that many industries have now been permanently established on a 
secure basis, and also indicate a consistent progress both in regard to the 
extension of existing industries and the establishment of new ones. The 
scale on which many manufactories are established in Australia naturally 
appears small in comparison with that of similar establishments in older 
countries of the world ; but it should be remembered that the scope of 



484 



Federal Handbook 



Australian manufactories is necessarily limited by the comparative sparseness 
of the population, and that, prior to 1901, development was retarded by 
the existence of intercolonial tariffs. 

Soon after the discovery of gold, the construction of the first railways 
(1854) and the re-establishment of regular steam-ship communication with 
Europe (1856) helped to encourage the nascent industrial activity. The 
Colonies of New South Wales and Victoria, which had recently (1855) 
received the benefits of responsible government, soon turned their attention 
to the settlement of an agricultural population on the land. The Acts which 
were passed had a beneficent effect on the working classes, giving them 
opportunities for employment not previously open to them, and fostering 
the manufacturing industries by increasing the measure of primary production. 
During the following years the various manufacturing industries prospered. 
The statistics of the States are not sufficiently complete or uniform to enable 
a statement of the progress of these industries to be given. The following 
table, however, showing, so far as returns are available, the number of fac- 
tories and the number of employes in each State at decennial periods since 
1861, will serve to indicate generally the progress which has been made : — 

Number of Factories and Employes in each State, 1861 to 1911. 



Year. 



New South 
Wales. 



Victoria. 



Queens- 
land. 



South Western 
Australia. Australia. 



Tasmania. 



Common- 
wealth. 



Number of Factories. 



1861 


601 


531 












1871 


1,813 


1,740 












1881 


2,961 


2,488 


571t 


823t 








1891 


3,056 


3,141 


l,328t 


996t 


175 






1901 


3,367 


3,249 


2,110t 


l,335t 


662 


420* 


ll,i43J 


1911 


5,039 


5,126 


1,657 


1,314 


710 


609 


14,455 



Number of Employes. 



1861 




4,395 












1871 


13,583 


19,569 




5,629t 








1881 


31,191 


43,209 




10,995t 








1891 


50,879 


53,525 




14,099t 








1901 


66,135 


66,529 


26,i72t 


19,283t 


12,198 


7,466* 


197,783J 


1911 


108,664 


111,948 


37,156 


27,907 


15,799 


10,298 


311,772 



♦ For 1902. t Not on same basis as other States, t Not on same basis for some of States as in 1911. 

Since the inauguration of the Commonwealth, the throwing open of the 
whole of the Australian markets to the industrial products of each State has 
facilitated the internal distribution of the products of Australian industry. 

From the above table it will be seen that the total number of factories 
in the Commonwealth in 1911 was 14,455, employing 311,772 hands. There 
are 2,033 factories employing less than four persons each, and 1,533 which 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 



485 



employ only four. At the other end of the scale there are 677 establishments 
employing 48,038 people (from 51 to 100 per factory), and 526 employing 
119,626 (over 100 each). 

Under the classification adopted at the Conference of Statisticians held 
in 1906, factories were placed under nineteen different categories, according 
to the nature of the industry carried on therein ; many of the categories 
were also subdivided. Where two or more industries are carried on by one 
proprietor in one building, each industry is, when possible, treated as a 
separate establishment. The statement given below shows the number of 
factories, the number of employes, the amount of wages, value of land, 
plant, etc., and of output according to the classification which has been 
adopted ; it must be understood, however, that this classification does not 
pretend to be exhaustive, but merely serves as a guide for the collection and 
presentation of statistics in the several States on a definite and uniform 
basis. 



Commonwealth Manufactories, 1911. 











Salaries 


Value of 


Value of 








No. of 


No. of 


and 


Land and 


Plant 


Value of 




Class of Industry. 


Estab- 


Hands 


Wages 


Buildings 


and Ma- 


Output 






lish- 


Em- 


Paid 


Used 


chinery 


(000 






ments. 


ployed. 


(000 
omitted). 


(000 
omitted). 


(000 
omitted). 


omitted). 






No. 


No 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


I. 


Treating Raw Material, product 
of Agricultural and Pastoral 
















Pursuits 


857 


9,805 


808, 


979, 


878, 


9,983, 


II. 


Treating Oils and Fats (Animal, 
















Vegetable, etc.) . . 


105 


2,019 


175, 


445, 


435, 


2,042, 


III. 


Processes in Stone, Clay Glass, 
















&c. 


719 


12,093 


1,225, 


1,229, 


1,300, 


2,964, 


IV. 


Working in Wood . . 


1,625 


27,948 


2,851, 


1,668, 


2,208, 


8,853, 


V. 


Metal Works, Machinery, &c. 


1,697 


60,538 


6,829, 


5,000, 


5,723, 


25,856, 


vl 


Connected with Food and Drink 


2,310 


45,623 


4,154, 


8,167, 


8,571, 


45,122, 


vn. 


Clothing and Textile Fabrics. . 


3,093 


83,845 


4,737, 


4,602, 


1,538, 


16,054, 


VIIL 


Books, Paper, Printing, and 
















Engraving 


1,144 


24,292 


2,379, 


2,964, 


2,482, 


6,307, 


IX. 


Musical Instruments, &c. 


19 


607 


66, 


82, 


18, 


190, 


X. 


Arms and Explosives 


14 


508 


38, 


42, 


56. 


147, 


XI. 


Vehicles and Fittings, Saddlery, 
















Harness, &c. 


1,208 


13,294 


1,114, 


1,453, 


283, 


3,021, 


XII. 


Ship and Boat Building and 
















Repairing 


87 


2,920 


362, 


1,163, 


478, 


664, 


XIII. 


Furniture, Bedding, and Up- 
















holstery.. 


613 


9,502 


879, 


898, 


178, 


2,614, 


XIV. 


Drugs, Chemicals, and By- 
















products 


189 


4,165 


269, 


760, 


602, 


2,536, 


XV. 


Surgical and other Scientific 
















Instruments 


41 


233 


20, 


62, 


11. 


61, 


XVI. 


Jewellery, Timepieces, and 
















Plated Ware 


169 


2,142 


200, 


301, 


62, 


712, 


XVIL 


Heat, Light, and Power 


351 


7 691 


976, 


2,320, 


6,612, 


4,311, 


XVIII. 


Leatherware, n.e.i. . . 


62 


1,226 


87, 


112, 


25, 


509, 


XIX. 


Minor Wares, n.e.i. . . 
Total 


152 


3,321 


253, 


251, 


139, 


1,240, 




14,455 


311,772 


27,431 


32,498, 


81,599, 


133,186. 



The above figures furnish some guide as to the importance of the manu- 
facturing industries of the Commonwealth. The total value of the output* 
for 1911 was £133,187,000, of which amount the sum of £79,042,000 represents 
the value of the raw materials used. The difference between these two 
amounts, viz., £54,145,000, represente the amount by which the value of 
the raw materials was enhanced in the process of manufacture. The total 
amount of salaries and wages paid in factories during 1911 was £27,532,000. 



486 



Federal Handbook. 



The largest number employed in any particular class in the Commonwealtli 
was in Class VII., in which there were 83,845 employes, or 26 "9 per cent, 
of the whole number. The class affording employment to the smallest 
number of hands was Class XV., in which there were 233 hands, or '07 
per cent, of the total number of employes. Classes VI., VII., and VIII. 
comprise those industries in which female labour is largely employed. 

The maximum amount of salaries and wages paid in any particular class 
was in Class V. (metal works, machinery, etc.), the amount being £6,829,000, 
or 24 '8 per cent, on the total amount ; the minimum amount was in Class 
XV. (surgical and scientific instruments), £20,000, or 0'07 per cent, on the 
total amount. The State in which the largest amount was paid was New 
South Wales. 

The average amount of earnings per employe per annum has increased 
from £77-3 in 1907 to £92-2 in 1911. The figures for these two years for 
each State are as follow : — 

Manufacturing Industries — ^Average Annual Earnings per Employe. 



state. 



New South Wales 
Victoria 
Queensland 
South Australia 
Western Australia 
Tasmania . . 



Commonwealth 




1911. 


£ 




96 


3 


83 


5 


87 


1 


99 


6 


129 


8 


84 


5 


92 


2 



In comparing the figures in the above table regard should be paid to the 
nature of certain industries which are carried on to a greater extent in 
some States than in others. In Victoria, for instance, where the average 
is lowest, there is a large number of factories and hands employed in 
Class VII. (clothing, etc.), and in that class wages are low, a great many 
women and children being employed. The position occupied by Western 
Australia is no doubt partly due to the higher cost of living in that State. 

It will be noted that — except in Tasmania — there has been a considerable 
increase in the average earnings per employe in each of the States during 
the period under review, despite the tendency of the number of females 
employed in certain industries to increase at a higher ratio than males. 
Taking the Commonwealth as a whole, during the period 1907-11 there has 
been an increase of 50" 25 per cent, on the total amount of wages paid and 
19- 31 per cent, on the average earnings per employe. 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 



487 



The amount expended in factories on fuel and light is of considerable 
importance ; in 1911 it amounted to £2,753,000, being an increase on the 
previous year's figures of £118,000. The classes of industry in which fuel 
was most extensively used were Class V. (Metal Works, Machinery, etc.), 
£917,000; Class VI. (Food, Drink, etc.), £546,000; Class XVII. (Heat, 
Light, Power, etc.), £454,000, of which amount £374,000 was expended on 
generating electric light and power, and Class III., £355,000, of which 
£278,000 was represented in brick and pottery works, etc., and glass factories 

The total value of raw materials worked up {i.e., exclusive of fuel, lubri- 
cants, etc.) in 1911 was £79,042,000, which represents 59*3 per cent, of the 
total value of the finished products {see below). The class in which the 
maximum value of raw materials was used was Class VI., " Connected with 
Food and Drink, etc.," the value being £33,306,000. The next important 
class in order of value was Class V., "Metal Works, Machinery, etc.," in which 
raw materials to the value of £13,824,000 were used. The class in which the 
minimum value appears is Class XV., " Surgical and other Scientific Instru- 
ments," the value being only £19,000. 

The difference between the total value of the output (£133,187,000) and the 
value of the raw materials used (£79,042,000) represents the amount added 
to the value of the raw materials by the process of manufacture. This 
difference, £54,145,000, is the real measure of the value of production of 
manufacturing industries. The value of the production in each State and 
the value per employe and per head of population are as follow : — ■ 



Manufacturing Industries — Value of Production, 1911. 



state- 


Value of 

Production 

(000 omitted). 


No. of 
Employes. 


Value of 

Production 

per Employe 


Value of 

Production 

per Head of 

Mean Population. 


New South Wales 
Victoria . . 
Queensland 
South Australia 
Western Australia . . 
Tasmania 


£ 
20,644, 
16,718, 
6,887, 
5,071, 
3,252, 
1,573, 


108,664 
111,948 
37,156 
27,907 
15,799 
10,298 


£ 
190-0 
149-3 
185-4 
181-7 
205-8 
152-7 


£ 
12-4 
12-6 
11-2 
12-3 
11-3 
8-2 


Commonwealth 


54,145, 


311,772 


173-7 


121 



It may be seen that the State of New South Wales far outstrips the other 
States in the value of the production of her factories, the value being 
£20,644,000, or 38 •! per cent, on the total for the Commonwealth. The next 
State in order of value is Victoria, which produced 30 "9 per cent. ; the value 
of the output of Queensland was 12 "7 per cent. ; of South Australia, 9 '4 per 
cent. ; of Western Australia, 6 "0 per cent. ; and of Tasmania, 2 '9 per cent. 
The four most important classes in order of value of output (Classes VI., 
v., VII., and I.) are the same as in order of value of raw materials used. 



488 



Federal Handbook. 



As the total value of the output for the Commonwealth was estimated at 
£133,187.000, there remained, after payment of £79,042.000, the value of the 
raw materials used, of £27,532,000 for salaries and wages, and of £2,753,000 
for fuel, the sum of £23,860,000 to provide for all further expenditure and 
profits. These results are shown in the following statement : — 

Manufacturing Industries — Cost of Production and Value op 

Output. 1911. 



Particulars. 


Total Amount 
(000 omitted). 


Per Cent, on Tot4l 
Value of Output. 


Raw 3laterials used 
Fuel and Light 
Salaries and Wages 
All other Expenditure* 


£ 

79,042, 

2,753, 

27,532, 

23,860, 


Per cent. 

59-3 

2 1 

20 7 

17-9 


Total Value of Output 


133,187, 


1000 



• Including interest and profits. 

In spite of the increased cost of labour and of raw materials, there is no 
indication that there has been any diminution in the percentage of profits 
derived from manufacturing industries during the past few years. Thus 
in 1908 the percentage of the total output available for interest, profits, 
advertising, and all other standing charges was 16 -6 ; in 1907 it increased 
to 17--6, and in 190S to 17 '8, compared with a percentage of 17 -9 shown in 
the above table. 

As an indication of the permanent character and stability of the industries 
which have been established in the Commonwe^ilth, it may be noted that the 
values of land and buildings and of plant and machinery used in the factories 
are rapidly increasing. Thus, for the whole Commonwealth, the total value 
of land and buildings and plant and machinery has increased from 1906 to 
1911 by £17,274,000. i.e., from £46,824,000 to £64,098,000, In 1911 the 
sum of £32,499,000 was invested in land and buildings occupied as manu- 
factories, the remaining £31,599,000 being the value of the plant and 
machinery used in connexion therewith. 

Of the total number of 311,772 hands employed in manufactories in 
1911, 81,644 were females and 230,128 males. In Xew South "Wales 
the ratio of the number of females employed in factories to the number 
of males during 1886 was about one to seven ; in 1891 one to six ; 
in 1903 it became about one to four ; and is now rather lower than 
one to three. In Victoria the ratio of females to males during the year 1886 
was about one to five. Five years later (1891) it was somewhat less, but in 
1896 had increased to about one woman to three men, and at present is 
sliofhtly over one to two. In the remaining States the ratios during 1911 
were — Queensland and South Australia, a little imder one female to every 
four males, Western Australia one to five, and in Tasmania one to six. The 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 489 

proportion for the whole of the Commonwealth was just over one to three 
The employment of women is, however, largely confined to a few trades. 

The great prosperity in clothing and textile industries is cue of the main 
causes of increase in female employment. Certain trades are specifically 
known as women's trades, such as clothing and textile trades, preparation 
of food, book-binding, and lighter work connected with the drug trade, as 
for example ^\Tapping. In common with commercial establishments, a 
considerable number of women is also employed as clerks and t}^ists in 
factories. 

The proportion of the sexes in Australian factories has not materially 
changed during the past five years, the ratio of females to every hundred 
males employed having increased only from 34 '6 in 1907 to 35 "5 in 1911, 
and this slight increase has been due not so much to the incursion of female 
labour into what may be termed men's trades, as to the activity in those 
trades in which women are ordinarily engaged, more especially in dress- 
making, millinery, etc. 

In the statistical compilations of the various States the term " child " 
may be taken to denote any person under sixteen years of age, excepting 
in New South Wales, where it denoted, for years prior to 1907, any person 
under fifteen. Since 1907 there had been an increase in the average number 
of children employed in every State, with the exception of Victoria and 
South Australia, there being a decrease of 1780 in the former and 53 in the 
latter State. The aggregate result for the Commonwealth is that the total 
number of children employed in factories has decreased from 14,622 in 1907 
to 13,921 in 1911. 

In each of the States, however, a comparison between the number of 
child-workers and the total number of persons employed shows a fairly r«egular 
decrease in the percentage of cliild labour. The 1908 and subsequent returns 
for Western Australia show a considerable increase over the 1907 figures ; 
this increase occurred mainly in clothing and other light industries in 1908, 
and has since shown a slight diminution. For the whole Commonwealth the 
percentage of children employed in factories on the total number of hands 
employed has shown a regular decrease from 5*9 per cent, in 1907 to 4*5 
in 1911. 

The preceding remarks and tables furnish a general view of the stage 
of development which manufacturing industries have attained in Australia. 
In order to make the information more complete, it must necessarily be 
supplemented by details exhibiting the development of individual industries. 
This alone will furnish adequate information as to the channels into which 
the main efforts of Australian manufacture flow. Since it is not possible, 
within the limits of this article, to give anything like a detailed account of 
the manufacturing industries of the Commonwealth, the following table 
has been prepared, so as to show, in summarized and comparative form, certain 
particulars regarding industries of special importance by reason of the number 
of persons employed, the number of factories, the amount of capital invested 
therein, the value of the production, or other features of special interest. 



490 



Federal Handbook. 



Particulars of More Important Manufacturing Industries in 

Commonwealth, 1911. 



1 
Class of Manufactory. 


1 


i 

o 

p. 
S 


of Land 
uildings, 
;, &c. 
imitted). 


TO " Ql 


of Fuel 
mitted). 




tier Expen- 
, Interest, 
roflts 
mitted). 


» "2 
1.1 




'o 


o 


oj W43 


oj V o 


oyA° 




*i ojPLh O 


-g.° 




d 


d 


|-gl§ 


cs cSO 


^li 




= 5l| 


* £'o 




K 


S5 


>gS£ 


>ss 


>§£ 


1^° 


<--3§£ 


Hoi. 








£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


Tanneries 


176 


3,247 


585 


2,099, 


22, 


332, 


245, 


2,698, 


Soap and Candle 


81 


1,668 


674, 


1,019, 


32, 


149, 


388, 


1,588. 


Saw Mills 


1,494 


26,785 


3,675, 


4,208, 


37, 


2,749, 


1,542, 


8,536, 


Agricultural Implements 


155 


5,156 


529, 


811, 


32, 


551, 


262, 


1,656, 


Entiineering Works, &c. . . 


820 


22,539 


3,286, 


2,832, 


179, 


2,343, 


1,261, 


6,615, 


Railway Workshops, &c. . . 


72 


17,425 


3,469, 


1,939, 


70, 


2,163, 


461, 


4,633, 


Smelting Works, &c. 


143 


7,036 


2,244, 


6,618, 


608, 


1,043, 


1,840, 


10,109, 


Bacon Curing . . 


73 


912 


261, 


1,186, 


12, 


105, 


210, 


1,E13. 


Butter, Cheese, &c. 


540 


3,730 


1,453, 


8,341, 


68, 


375, 


648, 


9,432, 


Ice and Refrigerating, &c. 


197 


6,146 


2,660, 


5,637. 


110 


622, 


677, 


7,046, 


Biscuit 


37 


3,329 


416, 


783, 


20, 


216, 


302, 


1,321, 


Jam and Fruit Preserving, &c. 


120 


4,352 


409, 


1,130, 


17, 


246, 


305, 


1,698, 


Confectionery . . 


95 


3,480 


490, 


844, 


15, 


229, 


263, 


1,351, 


Flour Mills 


233 


2,915 


1,791, 


6,078, 


79, 


342, 


583, 


7,082, 


Sugar Mills 


53 


4,764 


2,691, 


1,215, 


57, 


404, 


531, 


2,207, 


Breweries 


121 


3,450 


2,440, 


1,274, 


69, 


483, 


1,493, 


3,319, 


Distilleries 


32 


220 


283, 


115, 


7, 


25, 


100, 


247, 


Tobacco, Cigar, and Cigarette 


33 


3,730 


588, 


1,468, 


4, 


346, 


701, 


2,519, 


Woollen and Tweed ^Mills 


32 


3,200 


762, 


430, 


20, 


203, 


171, 


824, 


Boots and Shoes 


341 


13,772 


956, 


2,151, 


■ 17, 


1,097, 


449, 


3,714, 


Hats and Caps . . 


82 


3,856 


347, 


364, 


11, 


257, 


136, 


768, 


Coach and Waggon 


768 


8,030 


958, 


720, 


25, 


659, 


335, 


1.739, 


Furniture and Cabinet Making 


426 


6,918 


763, 


737, 


12, 


674, 


278, 


1.701, 


Electric Light and Power 


164 


2,432 


3,965, 




374, 


325, 


964, 


1,663, 


Gas and Coke . . 


136 


4,125 


4,628, 


715, 


73, 


571, 


1 1,003, 


2,362, 



5. Trade and Commerce. 

Under the provisions of the Commonwealth Constitution Act, power to 
make laws with respect to " trade and commerce with other countries and 
among the States " was conferred on the Commonwealth Parliament. It 
was also provided that on the establishment of the Commonwealth, Customs 
and Excise duties should pass to the Commonwealth, uniform Customs duties 
should be imposed within two years, and that on the imposition of such 
uniform duties, trade and commerce between the States should be absolutely 
free. The first Act passed under the authority of these provisions was the 
Customs Act 1901. This provided for the establishment of the necessary 
administrative machinery for all matters pertaining to the Customs, and 
prescribed, inter alia, the manner in which Customs duties should be computed 
and paid. It did not, however, determine the rates of duty. During the 
interval between the inception of the Commonwealth, on the 1st January, 
1901, and the coming into operation of the Customs Act 1901, the Customs 
Acts of the several States were administered by the Executive Government 
of the Commonwealth, under section 86 of the Constitution. The first 
Commonwealth Customs Tariff imposing uniform rates of Customs duty 
in all the States was introduced in the House of Representatives 
on the 8th October, 1901. " An Act relating to Duties of Customs," 
assented to on the 16th September, 1902, made provision that 
uniform duties of Customs specified in the Tariff schedule should 
be imposed from the 8th October, 1901. From this time onwards 
trade between the States became free, with, however, the exception, under 
section 95 of the Constitution Act, of the right of Western Australia to levy 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 491 

duty oil the goods from other States. The second Federal Tariff, succeeding 
the Kingston Act of 1901, came into force in 1907. The Commonwealth 
follows the British custom of enforcing a Tariff from the time it is presented 
to Parliament, modifying the rate of duty collected, if necessary, as the latter 
body passes the several items. The revision was in the direction of increased 
protection, though the free list was actually extended and a tariff of pre- 
ferential rates was pro\'ided on goods produced or manufactured in the United 
Kingdom. The general effect of the tariff is disclosed by comparing the 
results obtained by appl}'ing to the imports of 1907 the rates of duty, first 
under the tariff of 1902 and, secondly, under that of 1908. This shows 
that the percentage of free imports on total imports (exclusive of bullion 
and specie) increased from 35 "8 per cent, under the 1902 tariff to 40*7 under 
that of 1908, while at the same time the average rate of duty on all 
merchandise increased from 17*0 to 19*6 per cwt., and the average rate of 
duty on dutiable imports increased from 26*6 to 33*1 per cent. 

The total value of the oversea trade of the Commonwealth amounted 
in the year 1912 to over £157,250,000, that is, to £33 17s. 2d. per head of 
population. After making due allowance for imports for transhipment 
or re-export, the value of the trade per inhabitant is greater in Australia 
(where it is £32 lis. 2d. per head) than in any other country in the world, 
except Belgium (£40 19s. lOd.), New Zealand (£37 10s. 4d.), and Switzerland 
(£32 lis. 3d.), and while it is true that external trade is not in itself necessarily 
an index of the prosperity of a country, a consideration of the general charac- 
teristics and of the marked development of the trade of the Commonwealth 
over a number of years suffices to show that Australian affairs are progressing 
rapidly and favorably, more especially when it is recognised that there are 
practically no factors operating in the opposite direction. 

A review of the statistics of the total trade of the Commonwealth with 
oversea countries from the earliest date for which records are available 
{i.e., the year 1826, when the value was £566,000, or £10 13s. 2d. per inhabi- 
tant), shows that there was a marked rise, followed by a sudden fall, in the 
value of imports during the period 1837 to 1844.* This was contemporaneous 
with heavy land speculation and a subsequent severe financial crisis. In 
the early 'fifties, consequent on the discovery of gold, there was a gi-eat 
increase in trade, the total value of imports and exports rising from £5,070,000 
in 1851 to £15,694,000 in 1852, £29,393,000 in 1853, and £36,406,000 in 1854. 
This represents an increase per head from £13 9s. 2d. in 1851 to £56 3s. lOd. 
in 1854. The rapid influx of persons anxious to share the good fortunes 
of these times soon reduced the value of the trade per head, until, by 1858, 
it had declined to £31 19s. 6d., while the period 1867 to 1872 again shows 
a marked reduction in the value per head. For some years prior to this period 
a succession of indifferent seasons had been experienced in New South Wales, 
while in Victoria the labour market was congested, owing to the decline 
in alluvial gold-mining. 

An examination of the movement of the oversea trade of AiLstralia shows 
that periods of depressed trade have been recurrent at more or less regular 
intervals of from seven to nine years, and, measured by population, each 
succeeding depression since 1855 has carried the trade per head lower than 

• See graph on page 462. 



492 Federal Handbook. 



the preceding one, until the lowest point was reached in 1894. The year 
1892 marked the beginning of a period of acute financial stress, culminating 
in the commercial crisis of 1893. The collapse of these years is plainly 
reflected in the trade records of that period, the trade of 1894 falling to 
£5-4,028,000, a decline of no less than 26*7 per cent, in three years. In 
1895 there was a slight recovery, and a continuous upward movement until 
1901, when the trade reached £92,130,000, or £24 6s. Id. per head. A decline, 
due to drought, in the exports of agricultural, pastoral, and dairy produce, 
reduced the trade of 1902 to £84,591,000, but although in the next year 
there was a further shrinkage in the exports of agricultural produce, the 
increase in the value of the exports of metals, specie, butter, and wool was 
so large as to eSect an increase in the total trade. From 1902 the increase 
in the value of trade continued, until in 1907 it reached the amount of 
£124,633,000, equal to £30 4s. 5d. per inhabitant. 

The imports during 1907 were, doubtless, to some extent inflated by the 
importation of goods in anticipation of the Tarifl revision of that year. The 
trade of 1908 shows a decline of £10,523,000 as compared with 1907, of 
which £8,513,000 was in the value of exports, notwithstanding an increase 
of £3,448,000 in the export of gold and specie. This decline in the value 
of exports was largely due to reduced prices ruling for wool and metals in 
consequence of the financial crisis in the United States during the previous 
year, and in lesser degree to the smaller exports of agricultural and pastoral 
produce, due to the unfavorable season experienced in some of the States. 

The trade of 1909 per head of population was slightly more than in 1908, 
notwithstanding that the gold exports were less by £5,194,000. In 1910 
the trade reached an absolute value never before attained, while, measured 
by the population, the value of imports per head was higher than in any year 
since 1885, and the value of exports was — excepting the years 1906 and 1907 
— -the highest since 1857. The high value of exports is particularly striking 
when considered in conjunction with the exceptionally small exports of 
gold. The latter, already much reduced in 1909 as compared with 1908, 
decreased still further in 1910 to £4,109,000, the smallest recorded since 
1892. These relatively small exports of gold do not indicate the decline 
of the gold production, but are merely due to the fact that the recent prolific 
seasons and high prices made the exports of merchandise sufficient to meet 
all obligations abroad and so render the export of gold unnecessary. During 
1911 the exports of gold bullion and specie again increased to £11,541,000. 

With few exceptions, due to temporary dislocations of trade, the balance 
of trade prior to 1892 was on the side of imports, but from 1891 the reverse 
has been the case, the value of exports having increased by 120 '5 per cent., 
and the imports by 77*6 per cent. The excess of imports in the earlier years 
represents the introduction of capital in the form of Government loans and 
for investment in private undertakings, and the excess of exports in the later 
years represents mainly the interest and profit on the earlier investments, 
repayment of loans to foreign bondholders, and also freight on trade which 
is carried mainly by ships of the United Kingdom. The continued increase 
in the value of imports during 1912, while the value of exports remained 
stationary, is largely due to increased loan flotations in London, and also in 
some degree to the larger introduction of capital by immigrants. 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 



493 



The total value of the Commonwealth's exports in 1912 was £79,096,000, 
of which the United Kingdom accounted for £31,459,000, British possessions 
for £16.888,000, and foreign countries for £30,749,000. As may be seen from 
the following table, considerable alteration in the direction of exports is 
evident in the figures for the last twenty years. 

Commonwealth's Exports, 1891 to 1912 — Purchasing Markets. 





To- 




Period. 


United 

Kingdom 

(000 omitted). 


British 

Possessions 

(000 omitti'd). 


Foreign 

Countries 

(000 omitted.) 


Total 
(000 omitted). 


1891-5 

1896-1900 . 

1901-5 

1906-10 

1911 

1912 


£ 
23,804, 
24,624. 
23,930. 
32,984, 
35,310, 
31,459, 


£ 
2,812, 
5,067, 
13,507, 
10,754, 
15,825, 
16,888, 


£ 
7,067, 
11,402, 
13,800, 
25,598, 
28,347, 
30,749, 


£ 
33,683, 
41,093, 
51.237, 
69,336, 
79,482, 
79,096, 



It may be remarked that the decrease in the value of exports shipped to 
the United Kingdom in 1912 is largely due to the diminished production 
in Australia (owing to the drought in that year) of several important com- 
modities which are exported mainly to the United Kingdom. For example, 
the value of the exports of wheat decreased by £2.037,000, wool by £741,000, 
and butter £1,309,000. The exports of bullion and specie also decreased by 
£662,000. 

These figures show that the value of foreign markets to Australia is 
increasing at a much greater rate than the value of the export trade to the 
United Kingdom. The South African Union. India, and Ceylon are largely 
responsible for the increases in exports to British possessions. During the 
South African war large shipments of gold were sent from the Commonwealth 
to that country, and the more recent decline in the value of the exports to 
South Africa is due to the cessation of these shipments together with a decrease 
in the export of timber. The exports to India and Ceylon are also mainly 
of gold, of which exceptionally heavy shipments were made during 1904, 
1905, and 1911; the large increase in exports to foreign countries occurred 
mainly with respect to Belgium, G-ermany, and France. 

Notwithstanding an increase of 32*2 per cent, in the actual value of 
exports to the United Kingdom during the year 1912, as compared with the 
yearly average of the period 1891-95, the proportion of the total exports 
despatched to the United Kingdom has fallen from 70*7 per cent, in the 
earlier period to 39*8 per cent, in the year 1912. This decrease, and the 
corresponding increase in the export trade to foreign countries, are to some 
extent, undoubtedly due to the fact that wool and other commodities which 
were formerly despatched to the United Kingdom, and distributed from 
that centre, are now to a greater extent shipped direct to continental parts. 

The figures given, however, do not even now denote the total purchases 
by foreign countries of Australian produce, as large quantities are still 
distributed from London. 

C.12154. 2 I 



494 



Federal Haxdbook. 



The foregoing table shows a great increase in the value of exports to 
foreign countries, both in actual amounts and in relation to total exports. 
The value of exports to foreign countries during 1912 shows an increase 
of 335 per cent, over similar figures for the years 1891-5, thus increasing 
the proportion per cent, of all exports from 20*9 per cent, in the earlier 
years to 38*9 per cent, in 1912. 

In order to show the general development and nature of Australia's 
export trade, the following table is given, in which the exports are arranged 
according to class, the usual distinction being made between Australian 
produce and re-exports. 

Commonwealth Exports Arranged in Classes, i901 and 1912. 





Classes. 


Australian Produce. 


Other Produce. 


Total Exports. 




1901 


1912 


1901 


1912 


1901 


1912 






(000 


(000 


(000 


(000 


(000 


(000 






omitted). 


omitted). 


omitted). 


omitted). 


omitted). 


omitted). 






£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


I. 


Animal Foodstuffs, & 


c. . . 4,104, 


7,991, 


3.5, 


24, 


4,1.39, 


8,015. 


II. 


Vegetable Foodstuffs, 


&c. . . 4,633, 


8,741. 


81, 


170, 


4 714, 


8 911, 


III. 


Beverage.? (non-alcoh( 


)lic), &c. . . 3, 


5, 


43, 


78, 


46, 


83, 


IV. 


Alcoholic Liquors, <fec 


134, 


132, 


56, 


42, 


190, 


174, 


V. 


Tobacco, &c. 


5, 


79, 


62, 


52, 


67, 


131, 


VI. 


Live Animals 


474, 


328, 




5, 


474, 


333, 


VII. 


Animal Substances, 6 


:c. . . 16,754, 


31,283, 


"lO. 


6, 


16,764, 


31,289, 


VIII. 


Vegetable Substances 


&c . . 142, 


174, 


18, 


66, 


160, 


240, 


IX. 


Apparel, &c. 


42, 


77. 


171, 


204, 


213, 


281, 


X. 


Oils, &c. 


844, 


1,846, 


42, 


52, 


886, 


1,898, 


XI. 


Paints, (fee. . . 


1, 


7, 


15, 


8, 


16, 


15. 


XII. 


stones, &c. . . 


1.042, 


1,161, 


2. 


2, 


1,044, 


1,163 


XIII. 


Specie 


8,885, 


9,058, 


847, 


1,420, 


9,732, 


10,478, 


XIV. 


Metals (immanufactui 


ed). Ores, 














&c. 


8,916, 


12,364, 


10, 


24, 


8,926, 


12,388, 


XV. 


Metals (part manufac 


tured) . . 4, 


19, 


14, 


25, 


18, 


44, 


XVI. 


Metals (manufactured 


) . . 118, 


303, 


196, 


269, 


314, 


572, 


XVII. 


Leather, &c. 


661, 


716, 


13, 


55, 


674, 


771, 


XVIII. 


Wood, <fec. . . 


666, 


908, 


32, 


34, 


698, 


942, 


XIX. 


Earthenware, &c. 


7, 


19, 


23, 


16, 


30, 


35, 


XX. 


Paper, &c. . . 


22, 


72, 


52, 


112, 


74, 


184, 


XXI. 


Jewellery, &c. 


68, 


171, 


54, 


87, 


122. 


258. 


XXIL 


Instruments, &c. 


1, 


6, 


13, 


93, 


14, 


99, 


XXIIL 


Drugs. &c. . . 


86, 


268, 


43, 


55, 


120, 


323, 


XXIV. 


Miscellaneous 
Total 


130, 


235, 


122. 


234, 


252, 


4G9, 




47,742, 


75,963, 


1,954, 


3,133, 


49,696, 


79,096, 



From the above table it will be seen that there has been a very substantial 
expansion in the principal divisions of the export trade of the Commonwealth. 
Compared with 1901 the exports in 1912 of animal foodstuffs, principally 
butter and meat, show an increase of 93*7 per cent. ; vegetable foodstuffs, 
principally wheat, show an increase during the same period of 89*1 per cent. ; 
animal substances — wool, skins, etc. — show an increase of 86 "7 per cent.; 
oils, fats, and waxes — ^mainly tallow — an increase of 114-2 per cent. ; and 
wood, etc. (timber) an increase of 35*0 per cent. 

While Australia's exports are chiefly the product of the agi-icultural, 
pistoral, and mining industries, there is some promise of the Commonwealth 
exporting a substantial quantity of manufactured articles to the Eastern 
and isl?.nd markets, as well as to those countries which produce similar 
foodstuffs and raw materials, for the raising and handling of which Australia 
has evolved and now manufactures special machinery and goods. 

During recent years attention has accordingly been given by Australian 
exporters to the possibilities of these markets. Commissioners have been 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 



495 



sent by the States to Eastern trade centres to investigate and advise as to 
the requirements of these markets in regard to such commodities as Australia 
is prepared to supply, and a survey of the export returns of the past decade 
discloses a very material expansion in the value of the exports of 
merchandise in the direction indicated. The principal countries concerned 
in this trade are China, India, Ceylon, Japan, Java, Philippine Islands, 
Straits Settlements, and Hong Kong. 

The total value of imports into Australia in 1912 was £78,159,000. As 
regards countries of shipment, the value of goods consigned from the United 
Kingdom was £4.5,92-5,000, from British possessions £9,581,000, and from 
foreign countries £22,653,000. Classified according to country of origin, 
however, the imports from the United Kingdom were valued at £39,125,000, 
from British possessions at £8,614,000, and from foreign countries at 
£30,381,000.* The following table indicates the expansion in the import 
trade which has taken place since the year 1891 : — 

Commonwealth Imports, 1891 to 1912 — Countries of Shipment, 





From — 


Total 


Period. 


United Kingdom 
(000 omitted). 


Britisli Possessions 
(000 omitted). 


Foreign Countries 
(000 omitted). 


(000 omitted). 


1891-5 
1896-1900.. 
1901-5 . . 
1906-10 . . 
1911 
1912 


£ 
19,481. 
21.798, 
22,896, 
31,246, 
39,499, 
45,925, 


£ 
3.177, 
3.747, 
5,005, 
6,919, 
8.612, 
9,581, 


£ 
4,677, 
8,218, 
11,356, 
13,343, 
18,856, 
22,653, 


£ 
27,335, 
33,763, 
39,257, 
51,508, 
66,967, 
78,159, 



The foregoing tables show that while the actual value of direct imports 
from the United Kingdom during 1912 is above the yearly average of the 
period under review, being more than double that of the quinquennium 
1891-5, the proportion to total imports has diminished, having fallen from 
71 -3 per cent, during the years 1891-5 to 58 -8 per cent, in 1912. The position 
of the United Kingdom as indicated by her percentage proportion of the total 
trade is largely affected by the imports of vegetable foodstuffs, a branch 
of trade in which the United Kingdom cannot participate. The apparent 
diversion of Australian trade from Great Britain is more fully dealt with 
in a later part of this article. The growth of the value of imports from other 
British possessions during the past twenty years has been such as to increase 
the proportion to total imports from 11*6 per cent, in the years 1891-5 to 
12 -3 per cent, in 1912. Of the total imports from British possessions during 
1911-12, 35-0 per cent, was from New Zealand, 22-0 per cent, from India, 
11-3 per cent, from Canada, and 9-0 per cent, from Ceylon. The imports 
direct from foreign countries during the year 1912 represented 28 '9 per cent, 
of the total imports, as compared with 17 '1 per cent, during the years 1891-5. 
Of the total imports into Australia shipped from foreign countries, 22 • 7 per 
cent, was from Germany, and 41-7 per cent, from the United States. 



* In fiddition, tiic value of Australian prodiui 
£78,15'.i,000. 



ipnitcd was £:!!), OOd, inakiun up tlie total to 



496 



Federal' Handbook. 



An examination of the various categories with which imports are classi- 
fied shows that, as regards value, about 46-7 per cent, of the total imports 
are included in the two classes — (a) Apparel, textiles, and various manu- 
factured fibres, and (b) metals manufactured, including machinery. The 
following table shows the value of imports in 1901 and 1912, classified under 
twenty-four categories : — 

Commonwealth Imports Arranged in Classes, 1901 and 1912. 



Classes 



1901 


1912 


(000 


(000 


omitted) 


omitted). 



Increase. 



Valne 

(000 j Per Cent, 
omitted). 











£ 


£ 


£ 






I. 


Animal Foodstuffs, &c. 




793, 


1,038, 


245, 


30 


8 


II. 


Vegetable Foodstuffs, &c. 




2,926 


4,456, 


1,530, 


52 


2 


ni. 


Beverages (non-alcoholic), &c. 




1,055, 


1,864, 


809, 


76 


6 


IV. 


Alcoholic Liquors, &c. 




1,846, 


2,023, 


177, 


9 


5 


V. 


Tobacco, &c. 




718, 


1,046, 


328, 


45 


6 


VI. 


Live Animals 




40, 


244, 


204, 


510 





VII. 


Animal Substances, &c. 




124, 


337, 


213, 


171 


7 


vin. 


Vegetable Substances, &c. 




459, 


1,494, 


1,035, 


225 


4 


IX. 


Apparel, &c. 






12,066, 


19.496. 


7,430, 


61 


5 


X. 


Oils, &c. . . 






1,290, 


2,192, 


902, 


69 


9 


XI. 


Paints, &c. 






385, 


677, 


292, 


75 


8 


XII. 


Stones, &c. 






131, 


201, 


70, 


53 


4 


XIII. 


Specie 






173, 


543, 


370, 


213 


8 


XTV. 


Metals, Ores, &c. 






984, 


1,488, 


504, 


51 


2 


XV. 


Metals, part manufactured 




1,062, 


1,424, 


362, 


34 





XVI. 


Metals, manufactured 




7,492, 


16,985, 


9,493, 


126 


7 


XVII. 


Leather, &c. 






524, 


1,788, 


1,264, 


241 


2 


XVIII. 


Wood, &c. . . 






1,814, 


3,565, 


1,751, 


96 


5 


XIX. 


Earthenware, &c. . 






925, 


1,445, 


520, 


56 


2 


XX. 


Paper, &c. 






1,731, 


3,116, 


1,385, 


80 





XXI. 


Jeweller\% &c. 






1,065, 


1,874, 


809, 


75 


9 


XXII. 


Instruments. &c. 






219, 


518, 


299, 


136 


5 


XXIIl. 


Drugs, &c. . . 






1,472, 


2,394, 


922, 


62 


6 


XXIV. 


'Miscellaneous 






3,140, 


7,951, 


4,811, 


153-2 




Total 






42,434, 


78,159, 


35,725, 


84-2 



6. Trade of the United Kingdom with Australia. 

The failure of the United Kingdom to maintain the position formerly 
held by her in the import trade of Australia has, during recent years, become 
a matter of more than ordinary interest in both countries. In June, 1905, 
Mr. E. J. Jeiiray was sent here as a " Commissioner of the Advisory Committee 
on Commercial Intelligence of the British Board of Trade," to investigate 
the conditions and prospects of British trade with this country, and early 
in 1908 3Ir. Ben H. Morgan was sent on a similar mission by the Manufac- 
turers' Association of Great Britain, and in particular to report on : — (i.) The 
extent and possibilities of the market, with a view to (a) increasing export 
trade, (6) establishing branch factories inside the tariffs ; (ii.) the extent 
and condition of local industries ; (iii.) the nature and condition of foreign 
competition ; (iv.) transport services, with special reference to shipping 
" rings " and " conferences " ; (v.) the operation of local tariffs and effects 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., op Australia. 497 



of preferences. In December, 1908, a permanent Commissioner of the British 
Board of Trade arrived in Australia for the purpose of advising British 
manufacturers of the particular requirements of the Australian markets, 
with a view to improving the trade between the Commonwealth and the 
United Kingdom. 

In his report Mr. Jeffray gave the following principal causes of the success 
of the foreign manufacturer in the Australian market : — (i.) Greater prompti- 
tude and attention to orders ; (ii.) greater readiness to adapt their goods 
to the requirements of customers ; (iii.) more efficient representation in 
Australia ; (iv.) better package of goods ; (v.) more attractive appearance 
of goods ; (vi.) lower freights. 

Mr. Morgan reports " that the most important reason for the growth 
of foreign trade in Australia is that the foreign manufacturer is able to quote 
lower prices than the British manufacturer for goods of equal value." That 
the foreign manufacturer is able to do this, is, he contends, due to the 
following, viz. : — (i.) Protection. By virtue of protection for his home market 
" the foreign manufacturer can depend on a definite consumption therein, 
and is thus able to produce in larger quantities, and therefore more cheaply." 
(ii.) Lower shipping rates and raw materials. " Direct shipping services 
have been established with foreign countries, who carry goods generally 
at lower rates than British shipping companies carry British goods, and that, 
following the developemnt of manufacturing industries in foreign countries 
and the establishment of those cheap shipping facilities, the markets for 
raw materials are being diverted to those countries . . . and b}' carrying 
at lower rates, give their manufacturers an advantage in price in such raw 
materials." After quoting instances of goods being charged freights from 
Liverpool to Australia much above those charged on similar goods from 
New York to Hamburg via Liverpool to Australia, Mr. Morgan says : — 
" This shipping question is one of vital interest to manufacturers, and the 
time has come when they must, if they are to retain their position in export 
markets, interest themselves directly in freight matters, instead of leaving 
them as heretofore to merchants and shipping agents." 

Mr. Wickes, addressing the British delegates attending the seventh 
Congress of the Chambers of Commerce of the Empire, alluding to 
freights, said : — " I doubt if there is any question which so illustrates 
the want of organization among om* commercial community," and he 
suggested that there should be a keener study of freight rates from other 
parts of the world, and also closer co-operation of British manufacturers, 
for the more economical distribution of their manufactures. In subsequent 
reports, Mr. Wickes strenuously advocates more direct representation of 
British manufacturers in Australia. 

In order to draw any reliable conclusions as to the growth of import trade 
from the United Kingdom as compared with that from other countries, it will 
be desirable to furnish a comparison free from the influence of such trade as is, 
in the nature of the case, not open to the United Kingdom. For if the total 
imports were included in any such comparison, the results would be subject 
to certain limitations imposed by the nature of the imports from some coun- 
tries. For example, the total imports from the United States have been 
increased in certain years by imports of l)readstuffs, while imports of such 



498 



Federal Handbook. 



items as kerosene and timber also increase the proportion of imports from 
the United States without any prejudicial effect on the trade of the United 
Kingdom. Similar modification is not necessary in regard to Germany, 
as the nature of the imports from that country is substantially the same 
as from the United Kingdom. The following statement shows accordingly 
the percentage on the total value of Commonwealth imports of the principal 
direct imports fi'om the United Kingdom, Germany, and the United States 
during th^ years 1886, 1906, 1908 to 1910, and 19li. It should be observed 
that, prior to the year 1905, imports into the Commonwealth were recorded 
only against the country whence they were directly shipped. Although the 
values of direct imports do not afford completely satisfactory data (since the 
proportions of indirect trade vary to some extent), it is necessary in any com- 
parison extending fm'ther back than 1905 to use such figures. 

Percentage on Total Commonwealth Imports op Principal Direct 
Imports from United Kingdom, Germany, and United States, 
1886, 1906, 1910, and 1911. 



Nature of Imports. 


Year. 


United 
Kingdom. 


Germany. 


United 
states. 


AU 
Countries. 


Total imports of foodstuffs of animal 
origin, alcoholic liquors, apparel, 
textiles, boots, metal, paper and 
stationery, jewellery, timepieces, 
earthenware, cements, drugs, chemi- 
cals, fertilisers, and leather* 


r 1886 
1906 
1908 

' 1909 
1910 

I 1911 


89-31 
71-98 
71-29 
72-70 
71-04 
69-91 


1-65 
7-94 
7-66 
7-10 
6-91 
7-16 


3-01 
7-79 
8-84 
7-12 
8-07 
8-95 


100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 


Total imports (less bullion and specie) . . 


( 1886 
1906 
1908 

■ 1909 
1910 

I 1911 


73-71 
62-34 
61-11 
62-10 
61-82 
60-28 


2-06 
7-55 
7-32 
6-64 
6-44 
6-82 


6-16 
10-92 
12-42 

9-98 
11-07 
11-93 


100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 



* Representing over 70 per cent, of the total imports. 

The foregoing table shows that the share of the United Kingdom, as 
indicated by the records according to " Country of Shipment," in the trade 
of those classes of goods enumerated — representing over 70 per cent, of the 
total imports from that country — has declined from 89*3 per cent, of the 
whole in 1886 to 70*0 per cent, in 1911. The value of these imports from 
the United Kingdom has increased fi-om £20.489,000 in 1886 to only 
£32,038,000 in 1911, or by 56-4 per cent., while the total value of similar 
imports has increased fi-om £22,938,000 to £45,826,000, or by 99*7 per cent. 
Had the same proportion of the total trade been shipped from the United 
Kingdom dui'ing 1911 as in 1886 it would have represented £40.927.000 
instead of £32,038,000. 

It has been suggested that the larger proportion of imports now received 
from foreign countries is due to the establishment and increase of direct 
shipping with the countries concerned, and that trade formerly received 
through English ports is now received direct. From the Australian records 
it is impossible to ascertain the value of the indirect trade with foreign 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 499 

countries through the United Kingdom prior to 1905. The returns of the 
British Board of Trade, however, show that the percentage of foreign and 
colonial produce exported from the United Kingdom to Australia on the 
total exports was 14 '26 in 1911, compared with 14 "16 per cent, during the 
five years 1886 to 1890, and 13*52 per cent, during the 25 years 1886 to 
1910. 

It will be seen, therefore, that the average percentage of foreign goods 
despatched to Australia through the United Kingdom during 1911 is almost 
identical with the average of the years 1886-90, and is greater than the average 
of the past 25 years. It is therefore apparent that the increase of direct 
imports from foreign countries has not been, in the aggregate, at the expense 
of the indirect trade via Great Britain. 

Preferential trade with Great Britain has been under discussion in Aus- 
tralia for many years, and the Tariff Act of 1908, at present in force, provides 
preferential rates in favour of goods produced or manufactured in the United 
Kingdom. On the introduction of the preferential treatment of British 
goods, it was required that British material or labour should represent not 
less than one-fourth the value of such goods. From the Lst September. 
1911, it has been required, in regard to goods only partially manufactured 
in the United Kingdom, that the final process or processes of manufacture 
shall have been performed in the United Kingdom, and that the expenditure 
in material of British production and or British labour shall have been 
not less than one-fom'th of the factory or works' cost of the goods in the 
finished state. 

After an exhaustive analysis of the trade returns made in the Official 
Year-Book of the Commonwealth (Xo. 6, pp. 629 to 643), it is stated that the 
results do not disclose any positive effect of the preferential rate, one way 
or the other. It is further stated that there is every reason to believe that 
the records, in many instances, are not sufficiently accurate to allow of just 
comparisons being made, and that it will only be in the course of a number 
of years that anything like a definite opinion can be reached as to the efficiency 
of the preferential treatment, for, as Professor W. J. Asliley, in his preface 
to Mr. John Holt Schooling's British Trade Booh, says — " No comparison of 
isolated years, no comparison of short consecutive periods, can be relied 
upon to give properly comparable data." 

Primarily, it will be necessary in some way to eliminate the normal growth 
in business which would have taken place under any regime whatever in an 
advancing country ; and secondly, the significance of the statistics will 
depend upon a very rigid adherence to the same method of description in 
regard to items and the same definition of " Origin." If the practice of 
recording is as variable in the future as it has been in the past, no real de- 
ductions can be diawn, and this goes to show the importance of maintaining 
the same method of describing items, quite irrespective of their significance 
from the stand-point merely of revenue. 

In order to determine the course of trade, it will be essential to maintain 
in its integrity for a sufficient nunrber of years any classification of items 
once adopted, and no practicable means of analysis will enable one to pene- 
trate the significance of the trade if that course is not followed, because the 



50J Federal Handbook. 



determining effect of a preference which, in its nature, is likely to be not too 
well marked compared with the other elements of growth, can easily be 
vitiated by the entering of other possibilities of change into the results. 

7. Shipping. 

The shipping of the Commonwealth has hitherto been conducted partly 
under Imperial Acts, consolidated in the Merchant Shipping Act of 189-i, 
and amendments of these, and partly under Acts of the several States of 
the Commonwealth. By Part -IV., section 98, of the Commonwealth 
Constitiition Act, power to make laws with respect to trade and commerce 
was extended to navigation and shipping, and in pursuance of this power 
a Bill for an Act relating to Navigation and Shipping was introduced 
into the Senate on the 17th March, 1904, but was not proceeded with. 
After a Royal Commission in Australia and a conference between 
representatives of the United Kingdom, the Commonwealth of Australia, 
and New Zealand, in London, had been held on the subject of merchant 
shipping legislation, an amended Bill was introduced into the Senate in 
1907, and eventually received the Royal Assent in August, 1913. The Act, 
which is to come into force on a date to be proclaimed, is based largely on 
the British Merchant Shipping Acts and the Acts of New Zealand and New 
South Wales, and contains 425 sections divided into eleven parts, as follows : — 
I. Introductory. II. Masters and Seamen. III. Foreign Seamen. IV. Ships 
and Shipping. V. Passengers. VI. The Coasting Trade. VII. Wrecks and 
Salvage. VIII. Pilots and Pilotage. IX. Courts of Marine Inquiry. X. Legal 
Proceedings. XL Miscellaneous. Apart from important provisions relating 
to accommodation, manning, surveys, and pilotage, there are sections 
dealing with the safety of life at sea. It is provided that ships carrying 
50 or more passengers engaged on journeys exceeding 200 miles from port to 
port are to be equipped, unless specially exempted, with efficient wireless 
installation. 

An entirely new departure is marked by that portion of the Act dealing 
with the coasting trade. A ship is to be deemed as engaged in the coasting 
trade if she takes on board passengers or cargo at any port in a State or 
territory which is part of the Commonwealth, to be carried or delivered at any 
other port in the same State or territory or in any other State or other 
such territory. It is specially provided, however, that passengers can 
be carried on tlirough tickets to such ports, and that cargo and mails 
can be similarly carried. This provision means that unless licensed in 
Australia for the coasting trade (which implies compliance with Australian 
conditions as to pay, manning, and so on), a ship, whether it be British or 
foreign, cannot carry passengers from one port of the Commonwealth 
to another. An English mail steamer, calling first at Fremantle, could not 
carry passengers thence to Adelaide. There is, however, a further provision 
that the Governor-General in Council may by order declare that the carrj-ing 
of passengers between specified ports in Australia by British ships shall not 
be deemed engaging in the coasting trade. Underlying these provisions 
is the broad principle that all ships engaged in the coasting trade shall conform 
to Australian conditions as to manning, wages, and other matters. It is 
provided that no vessel shall engage in the coasting trade unless licensed to 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. .501 

do so. Such licences are for periods not exceeding three years, and it is. 
specified on the licences that the seamen employed are to be paid wages in 
accordance with Australian conditions, as enacted, and that in the case of 
a foreign ship there are to be the same number of officers and seamen as. 
would be required if she were a British ship, remastered in Au.stralia, or engaged 
in the foreign trade. No ship, whether British or foreign, which receives 
directly or indirectly a subsidy or bonus from a foreign Government can be 
licensed for the coasting trade. This provision will make it impossible 
for a vessel subsidized by a foreign Government to carry passengers, except 
on through tickets from port to port in the Commonwealth, or within territory 
subject to the Commonwealth. It is provided that the sections relating 
to the coasting trade shall also come into operation on a date to be fixed by 
proclamation, but shall not take effect on the date fixed for the commence- 
ment of the Act unless the proclamation fixing that date expressly declares, 
so. 

The total tonnage of oversea shipping entered and cleared the Common- 
wealth in 1911 was 9,98-5,000, which shows an increase of 1,162,000 tons,, 
or 13 '2 per cent., since the year 1907. The chief countries from and to which 
the shipping was entered and cleared are : — The United Kingdom (3, 001, 000- 
tons), New Zealand (1,886,000 tons), Germany (636,000 tons), Chile (576, 000- 
tons), the United States (535,000 tons). South Africa (375,000 tons), Japan 
(261,000 tons), India and Ceylon (243,000 tons), and France (239,000 tons). 

The shipping between the Commonwealth and the United Kingdom 
and European countries during the past five years shows that steady increase 
which indicates the consistent development of a well-established trade. The 
shipping in this direction during 1911 amounted to 4,213,000 tons, or 42 "2 
per cent, of the total oversea shipping of the Commonwealth, and was recorded 
against the several countries as follows :— United Kingdom, 3,001,000 tons 
(71-2 per cent.) ; Germany, 636,000 tons (15*0 per cent.) ; France, 239,00a 
tons (5*7 per cent.) ; Belgium, 187,000 tons (4-4 per cent.) ; other European 
countries, 150,000 tons (3 "6 per cent.).* 

The tonnage of shipping between the Commonwealth and New Zealand 
shows an expansion from 1,524,000 tons in 1907 to 1,886,000 tons in 1911, 
an increase of 362,000 tons, or 23*7 per cent., during the four years. The 
shipping with New Zealand represented 18*9 per cent, of the total shipping 
of the Commonwealth during 1911. 

The total tonnage between the Commonwealth and Eastern countries during 
1911 amounted to 1,822,000 tons, or 18*2 per cent, of the whole, representing 
an increase of 137,000 tons, or S'l per cent., as compared with 1907. The 
tonnage between Australia and China, Singapore, and Hong Kcjng collectively 
fell, largely in consequence of smaller exports of coal, from 413,000 tons in 
1907 to 267,000 tons in 1911, while Japan increased by 15,000 tons (6-1 per 
cent.) The tonnage recoided as to and from India and Ceylon rose from 
199,000 tons in 1907 to 243,000 tons in 1911. This tonnage, which is nuch 



• Ihfc reoord.H app'tar to shew that wtiilo the toiinaKo bctw^.n the Commonwealth and the United 
KinKflom increased by «29,0f)0 tons, efjiial to an increase of :iH'2 per cent., the tonnage between the 
Oomrnonwealth and European continental countries has increas(;d by .554,000 tons, or by 41*:i per cent., 
or in other words that 70*1 per cent, of the increase was credited to the United KinRdom and 29- 9 to 
the latter countries. .Vo real significance c»n, however, b« attached to these flKUres, for in many 
instances it must be regarded as almost accidental whether tonnage be recorded against the United 
Kingdom or against Belgium, Germany, or France. 



502 Federal Handbook. 



below that of the previous year, does not, of coui'se, include steamers to or 
from the United Kingdom or other countries calling at Colombo en route. 
The tonnage recorded as to and from the Philippines shows a rapid decline 
during the years 1909 and 1910, though some increase again appears in 1911. 
The shipping tonnage between Australia and the Philippines has also been 
affected largely by the coal trade, which has been latterly of much smaller 
dimensions than in 1907. Owing to the limitation of the records, the figures 
given in the tables do not represent the full volume of the shijjping between 
the Commonwealth and the Philippines. In addition to the shipping re- 
corded to the Philippine Islands the regular steam lines between the Common- 
wealth and Japan make Manila a regular port of call, and it is by these vessels 
that the general trade— apart from the coal trade— is chiefly carried. The 
whole of the shipping which was recorded as entering the Commonwealth 
dm-ing 1911 from the Philippines (57,000 tons) was, with the exception of 
3,500 tons, in ballast, and of the 103,000 tons which was recorded as cleared 
for that country, 78,000 tons cleared from the coal port of Newcastle. The 
tonnage between the . Commonwealth and Papua has increased rapidly, 
though consistently, during the past five years, the tonnage recorded between 
these two countries being 35,000 tons in 1907, and 150,000 tons in 1911. 
There has also been a marked expansion of the shipping to and from the Dutch 
East Indies during later years, the tonnage having increased from 44,000 
in 1907 to 159,000 in 1911. The shipping with the South Sea Islands, too, 
shows an expanding trade. 

The shipping tonnage recorded between the Commonwealth and African 
countries during 1911 amounted to 502,000 tons, an increase as compared 
with 1907 of 151,000 tons. Much of the trade between South Africa and 
Australia, however, is carried by steamers calling at ports in the former 
country on their voyages between the Commonwealth and the United King- 
dom, and which are not shown in relation to African ports in the shipping 
returns. Shipping tonnage with African countries — mainly confined to Cape 
Colony, Natal, and Portuguese East Afi'ica — rose fi'om 566,000 tons in 1904, 
to 650,000 tons in 1905, but fell to 528,000 tons in 1906, to 351,000 tons in 
1907, and to 226,000 tons in 1908, so that the figm-es for 1911 indicate a very 
material increase during recent years. These figures are, however, of no 
significance as an index of the transport requirements between the two 
countries, inasmuch as of the total tonnage passing between the two countries 
395,000 tons were fi"om Afi'ica to Australia, with only 106,000 the other way. 
Moreover, of the 395,000 tons which entered the Commonwealth fi-om 
Africa, 369,000 tons, or 93*2 per cent., were represented by vessels in 
ballast seeking freights fi'om Australian ports. 

The shipping of the Commonwealth with North and Central America 
dm-ing 1911 amounted to 728,000 tons (7*3 per cent, of the whole) repre- 
senting as compared with 1907 a decline of 291,000 tons. The large tonnage 
between the Commonwealth and North America during 1907 was due to 
unusually heavy exports of coal to the United States. The 728,000 tons of 
shipping with North and Central America dm'ing 1911 were recorded against 
the several countries as follows :— United States, 535,000 tons (73*5 per cent.) ; 
Canada, 163,000 tons (22 '4 per cent.); and Mexico, 30,000 tons (4*1 per 
cent.). 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., op Australia. 503 

The shipping between the Commonwealth and South American countries 
dm-ing 1911 — 835.000 tons— was 37 per cent, greater than in 1909, though 
still less than in 1908. The shipping in this direction dming 1911 was mainly 
engaged in the carriage of coal and wheat to Chile and Peru, and its decline 
as compared with the earlier years under review is due to the smaller export 
of coal. Of the total shipping tonnage between the Commonwealth and 
South America during 1911, 632.000 tons, or 75-7 per cent., is credited to 
the coal port of Newcastle. Of the South American countries, Chile is 
responsible for 576,000 tons (69*0 per cent.) ; Peru, 104,000 tons (12-4 per 
cent.); Argentine Republic, 62,000 tons (7*5 per cent.); Brazil, 46,000 
tons (5*5 per cent.) ; Uruguay, 41,000 tons (4*9 per cent.) ; and Ecuador, 
6.000 tons (0-7 per cent.). 

An important fact, fi'om its bearing on freight rates and its consequent 
possible effect on the coal trade of New South Wales with South America, 
is the absence of retujn freights from that country. Of the 354,000 tons of 
shipping which entered the Commonwealth fi'om South America during 
1911 only five vessels, totalling 13,000 tons, carried cargo. 

8. Railways. 

The first movement for the construction of railways in Australia took 
place in 1846, and in the com'se of the next six or seven years several private 
companies were promoted in Sydney and Melbomnie for the pm'poses of 
building various short lines. 

As difficulty was experienced by these companies in obtaining sufficient 
capital for undertakings which were considered by many to be of an experi- 
mental character, the Government, pushed on by the popular clamour for 
railways, either subscribed directly for a large share of the stock, or made 
loans, seciu'ed by mortgage. In some cases it also guaranteed interest or 
dividends to private investors. None of the early railways was undertaken 
without one or more of these forms of public support. 

The companies thus fostered were not, however, generally successful. 
In New South Wales the work of construction of the Sydney to Liverpool 
line was only well under weigh when the discovery of gold caused a general 
exodus from the city, and the company found it impossible to secure sufficient 
labour to carry on the undertaking. Other lines, both in New South Wales 
and Victoria, shared a similar fate, with the result that the Government had 
to step in and complete the work. In Western Australia two trunk lines 
were built by private companies on the land-grant system. In that colony 
the sparse population prevented the use of public funds for railway work, 
and land was consequently granted to build these two lines, which ran from 
the metropolitan district, north and south, to Geraldton and Albany respec- 
tively. The former still remains in private hands, and is the only trunk 
line in Australia which is not run by the Government. The latter was 
acquired by the Government in 1896 at a price of £1,100,000. At the 
present time, out of a total mileage of 17,842 miles open for general traffic, 
only 944 miles are under private control. 

The principle of Government ownership and control may therefore 
be regarded as the settled policy of the country. It may be said that the 
Governments have recognised the supreme importance of a railroad policy, 



504 Federal Handbook. 



not only as an element in the industrial, but even in the political life of 
nations, and have felt that nothincr short of complete ownership and direct 
management of the railroads would give them the power which, for national 
reasons, they must exert. 

The early essays at public control were not satisfactory, in regard either 
to economical administration or traffic service. With a view to overcoming 
the troubles which arose, the control and administration of railways was 
placed in the hands of responsible Ministers, who appointed a general 
manager to operate the lines. This system, however, opened the way to 
abuse, and resulted in political favoritism. To remedy this evil the control 
of the railways has been delegated to Commissioners, appointed by the 
Governor in Council, under statutory authority. The last State to adopt 
this scheme was Tasmania, where the control, management, and maintenance 
of the Government railways were placed in the hands of a Commissioner 
in 1911. In each of the States of New South Wales and Victoria there are 
three Commissioners, but in the other States only one each. The number 
of Commissioners, however, chiefly afiects convenience in administration, 
and does not aSect the principle of independent management. Under this 
system the Minister for Railways simply directs legislation, and represents 
the Railway Department in Parliament. He has no authority to directly 
interfere in the management, though the Ministry as a body, as the executive 
representative of Parliament, can veto a Commissioner's policy. The 
Commissioners issue annual reports to the Minister, except in South 
Australia, where the Commissioner reports to Parliament. In some of the 
States the Commissioners both build and manage the lines, but in others 
railway construction is in the hands of the Public Works Department. 

The progress made in opening up lines dm'ing the twenty years which 
followed the completion of the first line in 1855 was very slow. This was 
no doubt due partly to the difficulty of borrowing money at a reasonable 
rate of interest,* owing to the depreciation of Australian securities in London, 
and partly to the sparseness of the population, which it was feared would 
not justify the necessary expenditure. In the vicinity of Sydney, also, the 
ranges of mountains in the districts near the coast had to be either traversed 
or pierced by tunnels, at a considerable expenditure of time and money, 
thus retarding the expansion of the railway systems which now have their 
starting point at that city. Since the year 1875, however, greater activity 
in the construction of railways has been manifested, and satisfactory progress 
has been made in all the States of the Commonwealth. The great era of 
railway building in Australia was in the years 1887 to 1889, when the average 
rate of construction was between 700 and 800 miles per annum. In the 
eastern, south-eastern, and southern parts of Australia there now exists a 
considerable network of railway lines converging from the various agricul- 
tural, pastoral, and mining districts towards the principal ports, which are 
themselves connected by systems of lines running roughly parallel to the 
coast. These are shown on the accompanying map.* In the east, lines 
radiating from Townsville, Rockhampton, Brisbane, and Sydney extend 
inland in various directions for distances ranging up to over 600 miles ; in 
the south-east there are numerous lines, those in Victoria converging towards 



* See map on page 461. 



Manufactures, Industrial, Etc., of Australia. 



505 



Melbourne, while others in New South Wales have their terminus in Sydney; 
in the south there are three main lines, with numerous branches, running 
from Melboiirne, while from Adelaide one main line, with several branches 
to the coastal towns, runs inland in a northerly direction for a distance of 
nearly 700 miles, and another line runs in a south-easterly direction to 
various ports, meeting the main line fi-om Melbom-ne on the border of 
South Australia and Victoria. In addition to these main lines and their 
numerous branches, there are extensive suburban systems in Melbourne and 
some of the other cities of Australia, a considerable portion of the suburban 
traffic in Sydney being conducted by means of electric tramways. All these 
lines which have just been referred to are connected together by the main 
inter-State line, which • permits of direct communication between the foui' 
capital cities — Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide — a distance 
fi'om end to end of 1,790|^ miles. In Western Australia there is a connected 
system of main or trunk lines between the ports of the State and the agri- 
cultural, pastoral, and mining districts. From these main lines a number 
of branches has been constructed, opening up fresh agricultural areas to 
the ports and markets of the State. In the northern parts of Queensland 
and in the Northern Territory there are also a number of disconnected lines 
rimning inland from the more important ports. In Tasmania the principal 
towns are connected by a system of lines, and there are also, more especially 
in the western districts, several lines which have been constructed for the 
purpose of opening up mining districts. 

The number of miles of Government and private lines open in each State 
for general traffic on the 30th June, 1912, was as follows : — • 
Government and Private Railways. — Mileage open for General 

Traffic. 



state. 


state-owned 
Lines. 


Private Lines 

available for 

General Traffic. 


New South Wales 
Victoria 
Queensland . . 
South Australia 
Western Australia 
Tasmania 
Northern Territory 


Miles. 
3,832 
3,622 
4,266 
1,939 
2,598 
496 
145' 


Miles. 

141 

14 

346 

277 
166 


Commonwealth 


16,898 


944 



These lines are of no fewer than five different gauges, and, though not 
at present of any considerable magnitude, the extra cost, delav, and incon- 
venience incurred by the necessity of transferring through passengers and 
goods at places where there are breaks of gauge, are becoming more serious 
as the volume of business increases. 

Although the cost of alteration to a uniform gauge would be great, many 
propo.sitions have from time to time been put forward with the obje(;t of 
securing such a gauge, and attention has been drawn to the importance of 
the unification of gauges before further expenditure on railway construction 
is incurred by the States. The problem is, however, one which is by no 
means easy of solution, and the difficulties are increased by the introduction 
of what may be called (piestions of Io(;a] or State policy. That its solution 
would facilitate the development of commerce and the settlement on the 



506 Federal Handbook. 



land throughout the Commonwealth is now widely recognised. The economic 
disadvantages of breaks of gauge, and of any artificial restrictions in regard 
to trade finding its proper geographical outlets, are also seen by dispassionate 
observers. It is obvious, too, that in the event of a foreign invasion of 
any part of the seaboard, the interchange and concentrations of rolling-stock 
for the transport of men and war materiel would be impeded, and might 
result in confusion and loss. It is asserted, moreover, that unification of 
gauges would tend to reduce to a negligible quantity all tendency to dis- 
organization and undue congestion likely to occur at times of bountiful 
seasons ; that various trades and industries would be benefited by the 
aggregation, at times of abnormal or periodic activity, of idle trucks from 
other States ; that there would be a large saving in the total capital expen- 
ditm-e on rolling-stock ; in other words, that the fullest use of all rolling- 
stock and the meeting of all exigencies would be facilitated. 

The question naturally arises as to which gauge should be adopted 
as the universal gauge of the Commonwealth. As regards Government 
railways only, the New South Wales gauge of 4 ft. S^ in. has a 
mileage of 3,832 ; Victoria and South Australia have a combined mileage 
of 4,126 of 5 ft. 3 in. gauge ; while Queensland, South Australia, Western 
Australia, and the Northern Territory have together 8,322 miles of 3 ft. 6 in. 
gauge. By far the greater part of the mileage of private railways open for 
general trafiic has also been constructed to the 3 ft. 6 in. gauge. The mere 
question of preponderance of mileage, therefore, indicates the 3 ft. 6 in. gauge 
for adoption. But this question is obviously subordinate to those involving 
engineering and economic considerations. Thus, the relative efficiency 
from the widest point of view, the relative costs of alterations of permanent 
way and rolling-stock, of carrying capacity and speed, that is to say, questions 
of a technical nature, about which figures are not available, enter into the 
grounds for decision. As regards the unification of the New South Wales 
and Victorian lines, the advantage of reducing the broad gauge to the 4 ft. 8h in. 
gauge is that there would be no necessity for the alteration of tunnels, cuttings, 
bridges, or viaducts. 

Several conferences have been held from time to time, for the purpose 
of adopting a uniform gauge. The last of these was in April, 1913, when 
engineers representing the six States and the Federal Government recom- 
mended the adoption of the 4 ft. 8| in. gauge as the standard gauge for 
Australia. The cost of conversion to that gauge of all lines on the continent 
was estimated at £37,164,000. 

The necessary arrangements have now been completed for connecting 
the railways of the eastern and southern districts of Australia with the 
Western Australian lines by the construction of a line between Port Augusta, 
in South Australia, and Kalgoorlie, on the Western Australian gold-fields, 
a distance of 1,063 miles. The estimated cost of construction and equip- 
ment of the line is £3,988,000. It is claimed that the line would be of 
immense benefit in the expedition of the European mails to the southern 
and eastern parts of the continent, and, if occasion should arise, in facilitating 
the transport of troops. A Railway Construction Department has been 
created to carry out the work, and on the 14th September, 1912, the fii'st 
sod of the Kalgoorlie-Port Augusta Railway was turned by the Governor- 
General at Port Augusta. A commencement has also been made at Kal- 



Manufactures, Industrial. Etc., of Australia. 507 

goorlie. and it is estimated that the line, which, is being bnilt from both ends, 
and will have a gauge of -i ft. 8J in., will be completed in three years. In 
the Northern Territory Acceptance Act (under which the Northern Territory 
was transferred from the State of South Australia to the Commonwealth), 
the construction of a transcontinental line from South Australia is provided 
for ; under that Act the property in the railways from Port Augusta to 
Oodnadatta, and from Darwin to Pine Creek, has been transferred to the 
Commonwealth Government as fi-om the 1st January, 1911. The present 
Commonwealth Government has recently announced its intention of intro- 
ducing the necessary legislation to proceed with the survey and construction 
of this line, which is said to present few engineering difficulties. 

The total capital expenditure on the Government railways in Australia 
up to the 30th June, 1912, was £160,557,000, which gives an average cost 
of £9,502 per mile. This average is, however, unduly swollen by the heavy 
cost of some of the early lines, such, for example, as that from Melbom'ne 
to Bendigo, which was opened in 1862, at a cost of over £48,300 per mile. 
Many of the more recent lines have been built at an average cost of less than 
£1,500 per mile. The gross revenue of the Government railways in 1912 
was £19,101,000, which works out at £1,130 per average mile worked, or 
7s. 9d. per train mile run. Nearly 57 per cent, of the gross revenue is derived 
from goods and live stock traffic receipts, 41 per cent, being from coaching 
traffic, and about 2 per cent, fi'om miscellaneous sources. As regards coaching 
traffic, the receipts per passenger journey range from about 6d. in Victoria 
to over Is. 9d. in Tasmania. The difference in these amounts is not accounted 
for by the rates charged, since the latter are fairly uniform in the several 
States, but is largely due to the different traffic conditions. Thus, the low 
cost per passenger journey in Victoria is accounted for by the large number 
of metropolitan suburban passengers in that State. 

The total working expenses in 1911-12 amounted to £12,471,000, or 
65*3 per cent, on the gross earnings. This percentage has increased since 
1907-8 from 58*7 per cent., but the increase is stated to be due mainly to 
advances in salaries and wages of the staff and employes. The working 
expenses per average mile worked have increased from £583, in 1907-8, to 
£738, in 1911-12, while the expenses per train mile run have increased from 
48 '9 to 54*2 pence in the same period. The percentage of working expenses 
on gross revenue in 1911-12 ranged from 63'2 in Queensland, to 71*3 in 
Western Australia (and to 117*2 in the Northern Territory). In order, 
however, to make an adequate comparison of the working expenses of the 
Government railways in the several States, allowance should be made for 
the variation of gauges and of physical and traffic conditions, not only on 
tlie railways of the different States, but also on different portions of the same 
system. Where traffic is light, the percentage of working expenses is 
naturally greater than where traffic is heavy ; and this is especially true in 
Australia, where ton-mile rates are in many cases based on a tapeiing prin- 
ciple- — i.e., a lower rate per ton-mile is charged upon merchandise fiom 
remote interioi' distiicts — and where on many of the lines there is but little 
backloading. Further, though efforts have been made from time to time 
to obtain a unifoim system of accounts in the several States, the aiinujil 
reports of the Commissioners do not yet comprise fully comparable data 
of railway expenditure. As an indication of the differc^nt traffic; (londitions 



508 Federal Handbook. 



prevailing in the several States, it may be mentioned that the number of 
passenger journeys per mile of line worked in 1911-12 ranged from 3,409, 
in Tasmania, to 29,420, in Victoria, while the number of tons of goods and 
live stock carried per mile worked was lowest in Queensland (843), and 
highest in New South Wales (2,871). 

The net revenue in 1911-12, after payment of working expenses, amounted 
to £6,630,000, or 4*1 per cent, on the capital expenditure. This gives an 
average of £392 per average mile worked, or 2s. 4|d. per train mile run. 
The total amount of interest payable on railway loan expenditure in 
1911-12 was £5,6.50,000. Deducting this amount from the gross profits, a 
net profit of £980,000 is left. This is equal to 0'6 per cent, on the total 
cost of construction and equipment. Though the average percentage of 
gross profits in 1911-12 was 4*1 per cent., an average does not accurately 
express the position. At an early period the need of constructing 
railways for the sole purpose of opening up undeveloped districts was 
recognised, and lines were built which could not possibly pay for 
some years to come ; as these railways always preceded population, 
the money had to be raised at an almost speculative rate of interest, fre- 
quently amounting to 6 per cent., while the more recent loans have been 
effected at less than 4 per cent., hence the railways have been handicapped 
by a burdensome interest. At the present time, also, spur lines are con- 
structed, which can scarcely be expected to instantly return revenue in 
excess of the expenditure, and so must, for a time at any rate, be a charge 
on the more developed branches of the railway systems, and tend to increase 
the ratio of working costs to revenue. It may be noted, however, that, 
although the loans made for expenditure on railway construction and equip- 
ment very largely increase the amount of the public debt of the Common- 
wealth, forming, in fact, more than half the total debt, the money borrowed 
has not been sunk in undertakings which give no return, but has been ex- 
pended on works which are increasingly reproductive, Welding in most cases 
a direct return on the capital expended, and representing a greater value 
than their original cost. In Europe the national debts of various countries 
have been incurred principally through the expenses of prolonged wars, 
and the money has gone beyond recovery, but in Australia the expenditm-e 
is represented to a large extent by public works, which pay a direct return 
which is, on the whole, greater than the amount of interest due upon capital 
invested. In addition to the purely commercial aspect of the figures relating 
to the revenue and expenditure of the Commonwealth railways, it is of 
importance that the object with which many of the lines were constructed 
should be kept clearly in view ; the anticipated advantage in building these 
lines has been the ultimate settlement of the country rather than the direct 
returns from the railways themselves, and the policy of the State Govern- 
ments has been to use the railway systems of the Commonwealth for the 
development of the country's resources to the maximum extent consistent 
with the direct payment by the customers of the railways of the cost of 
working and interest charges. Further, the money has been spent in develop- 
ing immense agricultural, pastoral, and mineral resources, which add to 
the wealth of the community, while the benefits conferred in providing a cheap 
and convenient mode of transit, and in generally furthering' the trade and 
the best interests of the Commonwealth, are incalculable. 



Educational Policy axd Development. SOU 

CHAPTER XII. 

EDUCATIONAL POLICY AND DEVELOPMENT. 

By Francis Anderson, M.A., Professor of Logic and Mental Philosophy 
at the University of Sydney. 



SYNOPSIS. 

A policy of centralization — how it arose, and developed. — Early history of education 
in New South Wales. — Comparison with England. — The failure of local effort. — Com- 
parison with the United States. — The undenominational system and the religious 
•difficulty. — The first stages of the evolution of Australian education. — The stage of 
reform and reconstruction. — Borrowing versus development. — The old sj^stem and the 
new : Difficulties of transition.^ — Subjects and methods. — Vocational training.- — The new 
schemes of education in Vctoria and New South Wales. — Technical education. — Co- 
ordination and the need for National Councils. — Education in outlying districts. — The 
status of the teacher. — Physical culture and medical inspection. — Moral and religious 
culture. — Australian Universities, comparative statistics. — The educational ladder and 
the broad highway. — The University in relation to schools, technical education, and 
labour. — Defects of a centraUzed s\'stem of education. 

As contrasted with the highly organized systems of France and 
Germany, English education is said to be unsystematic, and American 
education uncentralized.* There maybe certain advantages in an educational 
policy which leaves the future to take care of itself, but public opinion in 
Australia has long abandoned the faith in laissez faire as a suitable gospel 
for a nation in course of construction. Past history and present necessities 
point to a future development in which the two salient features will be system 
Siud centralization- Whether the combination of these two features is to pro- 
duce a mechanical or an organic system will depend on the character of the 
people who live under the system. It is possible for a nation to be both politically 
free and politically organized. A people trained in habits of freedom will 
not submit to the tyranny of any bureaucratic rule until it ceases to do its 
thinking for itself. The bugbear of bureaucracy, like the spectre of 
socialism, is a favorite figure w'th journalists and politicians, but the 
Australian people, although like other democracies it has a fondness for 
phrases, takes political banners and battle cries with less seriousness than 
either the English or the American peoples. It carries still further the 
excellent English habit of treating proposals of social and political reform 
on their merits, as ^^t'actical business measures for promoting the welfare 
■of the nation. In the matter of education it has made up its mind that what 
it wants is system, and that centralization is the best way to get it. 

In New Zealand, a homogeneous community is divided into provinces, 
whose history, physical divisions, and divergence of interests have led to the 
adoption of a decentralized educational system. Australia is a continent, 
and it is divided, not into provinces, but into self-governing States. While 
its population is, in all essentials, much more homogeneous than that of any 
other nation 'n the world, the enormous extent of its area and the variety 
of its economic interests will make the task of administration more and more 
complex as population increases. A " socialized " control of Australian 
education as a whole from a single administrative centre is outside the range 

•Adams, Evolution of Educational Th'ory, p. 377. 
C 12l.-)4. 2k 



510 Federal Handbook. 



of practical politics at present, and, unless for those who fancy that- 
national education can be " managed " on the analogy of a postal or 
railway service, is outside any profitable discussion of a possible future- 
policy. 

The unit of administration is then, and will continue to be, the State. 
AVithin each State the policy of Cv-ntralization was not adopted as the result 
of a carefully thought-out plan. It rather forced itself on the public and on 
the legislature as the only way out of the many difficulties of the educational 
situation during the second and third quarters of the last century. These 
difficulties were partly economic in their nature, partly social and religious. 
The desire for a definite public policy arose in the breakdown of existing- 
agencies to supply the needs of a rapidly-growing population. But there 
was never at any time in those early days any broad or scientific discussion 
of educational means or ends. 

In the England of the same period, the problem of national education was 
treated with perhaps still greater disregard of the vital issues involved. la 
New South Wales, Mr. Robert Lowe, afterwards an English IVIinister of the 
Crown, obtained in 1844 the appointment of a Select Committee to report on 
the actual state of education, and to devise means for the establishment of a 
system which would be in accordance with the needs and desires of the com- 
munity. The report of that Committee contained, in principle, the scheme 
of later development. In the five years which were spent in overcoming the- 
efforts to block progress, made by the opponents of a uniform and undenomi- 
national system of national education, Mr. Lowe probably learned lessons 
which afterwards influenced, and in ways that were in some respects- 
harmful, the course of English legislation. 

Three notes struck during the long controversy were repeated in England, 
and in the clamour raised over certain issues the educational aspects were- 
obscured. The three notes were economic, political, and religious. The 
economic note appealed to those who saw waste and misdirection of energy 
through competition and overlapping in some districts, and absolute neglect 
in others. The pernicious system of payment by results was designed by 
Mr. Lowe's ill-directed business instincts, but was not imported into England 
from Australia, for, by a happy fortune, payment by results was never 
part of the educational policy of New South Wales, though at a later period 
it was adopted for a time by Victoria, with disastrous consequences. In a 
community where Ministers of Education are chosen as a rule not for any 
special educational qualification, it was more by good luck than by good 
guidance that Australia was saved from a policy wliich, wherever practised, 
has earned universal condemnation. 

The political note may be expressed in the phrase which Mr. Lowe made- 
popular in England, " Let us educate our masters." Australian legislation 
has, on the whole, been more uniformly progressive than corresponding 
English legislation. There have been " no leaps in the dark," and the con- 
sequent fear of what might happen when the educated ceased to correspond 
with the governing classes has never been so acute as in the older country, 
where the struggle between privilege and popular right roused so much 
passion and dread. Yet no democracy can afford to regard with indifference- 
the existence of large numbers of uneducated citizens. In 184-5, Mr. Lowe's- 



Educational Policy and Development. 511 

Committee reported that more than half the children of New South Wales 
(which then included the territories now known as Victoria and Queensland) 
were receiving no education at all. 

The religious, or rather, ecclesiastical note, was sounded l\y those who were 
opposed to a merely secular education. The " religious difficulty " in Aus- 
tralia will be discussed later. Here, it need only be said that while credit 
may be given to the opponents of a common and undenominational school 
system for the strength of their conscientious conviction, they fought a losing 
battle from the first. Divergent ecclesiastical interests, the defective instruc- 
tion provided in many of the private schools, and the insistent demand made 
for the subsidy ol church schools from the common national purse, combined 
to hasten a new order wMch seemed predestined from the first, a school system 
which should be free, compulsory, and absolutely undenominational, and ■ 
under centralized State control. This became the ideal towards which 
public opinion converged, and although in some respects the ideal is not yet 
fully realized, the issue was virtually fought and won in the years of con- 
troversy, which ended in 1848 (the year of European revolution) with the 
incorporation of the Board of National Education. The actual scheme which 
that Board attempted to carry out was no doubt unworkable from the first. 
It was a compromise which satisfied nobody at the beginning, and ended by 
irritating everyone. Demands were made on local aid which could not be 
fulfilled. As the Board, by its regulations, could not grant an application 
for a new school unless one-third of the cost of building and equipment were 
supplied by the applicants, education was neglected just in those districts 
where it was most needed. The principle of concm'rent endowment of de- 
nominational schools was a source of continual jealousy, strife, and political 
and ecclesiastical engineering. The Board of National Education had to 
subsidize its own rivals without control over the expenditure of funds which 
it was compelled by Parliament to grant. 

For eighteen years the unworkable scheme endured until it was replaced 
by the Public School Act 1867 of Sir Henry Parkes. Struggling with great 
difficulties, the Board of National Education had accomplished great things. 
At the end of its first year of administration it had only four schools under 
its direct control. At the end of its term of office it had brought into existence 
259 National schools, with an attendance of 19,641 pupils. The strength of 
the opposition may be estimated by the fact that at the latter date (1867) 
there were in existence 310 denominational schools, subsidized by Govern- 
ment (without control), having an attendance of 47,627 pupils. The Board 
had to organize a workable scheme of studies, a system of classifi- 
cation, examination, and inspection, to devise means for the training of 
apprentice teachers, and to frame an adequate scale of remuneration for all 
teachers. The Board worked according to its lights. Judged from the 
business point of view, its efforts were praiseworthy and fairly successful. 
Judged from the politico-ecclesiastical point of view, its best work was, in 
the opinion of the majority, to demonstrate the failure of concurrent endow- 
ment. Judged from the educational point of view, as now understood, the 
result of the Board's work was to give a bad example to all Australia. This 
criticism is an historical, not a personal one. The period was one of dense 
ignorance, an ignorance unconscious of itself, on all but the superficial and 

2 K 2 



512 Federal Handbook. 



commonplace aspects of national education. A comparison of the English 
educational historj'' of the same period would disclose the same ignorance of 
vital issues, the same short-sighted measures for patcliing defects, the same 
antiquated methods of training teachers, the same subordination of education 
to instruction in certain traditional subjects, the same formal and mechanical 
methods of examination and inspection. The " regulations," framed as a 
scheme ad hoc, to provide a convenient means of setting the educational house 
in order, soon acquired the authority and almost the sanctity of a traditional 
document. Teachers were examined later on the regulations as on a kind of 
Thirty-nine Articles. They were supposed to provide the full and fitting 
framework within which all future development would be carried on, and in 
fact they served as a model for the other States in their initial task of common 
school organization. Under the regulations it was the official who governed, 
and an analysis of the administrative system would reveal the real constitution. 
The secret of its strength and its weakness lay in the narrowness of the ideas 
behind it. The ideals set up were attainable without much difficulty. The 
Annual Reports were accepted as a proof that all that was wanted was an 
extension of the system on existing lines. 

The Public Schools Act of 1867 contained certain inherent weaknesses 
which in course of time became patent. There was little or no dissatisfaction 
with the educational defects of the system, which had to wait, until the end 
of the century brought a wave of reform which shook the educational fabric 
in almost every State in Australia. It w^as only the working of the adminis- 
trative machinery which, at the time, was felt to be defective. The provision 
that one-third of the cost of new school buildings should be contributed by 
the people of the locality could not, in a new country, be maintained for long 
without a corresponding increase of local responsibility and power of self- 
government. But Australia was already committed to a policy of central 
administration in almost every Department. The power of the politician had 
grown in the land, and any attempt at devolution of powers and responsibili- 
ties was resisted, not only by local districts, accustomed to draw on the 
national exchequer for almost every requirement, but by members of Parlia- 
ment, who succeeded in blocking all attempts at establishing a system of 
local government for nearly half a century. Successive Governments were 
likewise unwilling to sm-render the power over members which was derived 
from a lavish distribution of grants to districts, politically useful as a means 
of manipulating majorities, but injurious to public and parliamentary morality. 
The local obligation to contribute one-third of the cost of new buildings was 
abolished by the Act of 1880, due also to Sir Henry Parkes. Since 1880 the 
cost of new schools is defrayed directly by the Department of Public Instruc- 
tion. Except for a few unimportant exceptions, the general policy of the 
Australian States in this respect is the same. The Department determines 
when, where, and how new schools should be erected, both in urban and rural 
districts. In many cases schools have been built with the slightest regard to 
what is required, structurally, hygienically, and educationally. School 
inspectors who, in addition to their ordinary duties, have often to act as 
clerks of works, are limited, as architects and officials are limited, by the 
economic necessities of the situation. It is difficult to gauge the requirements 
of a new and sparsely-settled district. Between the rapid growth of the city 



Educational Policy and Development. 513 

population and the constant spread of the rural population, the Department 
authorities have to do, not what they desire, but what they can, with the 
limited means at their disposal. The result is that from almost every point 
of view the great majority of Australian schools are seriously defective. 
Only within the last few years has an intelligent care been taken to build new 
schools with due regard to what is required by the best modern standards. 
There is probably not a single school in Australia which could stand com- 
parison with many admirably constructed and well-equipped public schools 
of England, G-ermauy, Switzerland, and the United States. Here we touch 
one great defect of our system of centralized administration. It may be 
modified, if not removed, by greater parliamentary liberality and the develop- 
ment of public knowledge and public interest in educational matters. But 
when the special interest of the local district is not directly appealed to, it 
cannot be expected to show that pride and sense of responsibility which 
together have helped to produce the magnificent school buildings adorning 
even small cities in the United States. It may be useful in this connexion to 
refer to a common but misleading comparison made between Australia and 
the United States in the matter of expenditure on education. At first sight, 
the Australian State seems to suffer grievously from the comparison. Ten 
per cent, is a fair statement of the proportion of the total expenditure on 
education by the Australian State. The expenditure in an American State 
is often 50 per cent, of the total State expenditure, supplemented in many 
cases by an added 25 per cent, of the total expenditure of a local community. 
But this is only one of the many cases in which statistical comparisons have 
to be corrected by a wider knowledge of the political conditions of the countries 
compared. If the American State had to undertake the burdens of the Aus- 
tralian State, it could not aSord the generous, sometimes lavish, expenditure 
on primary, technical, and university education. One burden alone may be 
mentioned from which the American State is entirely free, railway con- 
struction and maintenance. For better or worse, the Australian State has 
chosen to take upon its shoulders many burdens which are left in other 
countries to the initiative of individuals or private corporations. We need 
not discuss the wisdom of collective, as contrasted with private, enterprise 
in the task of social and political construction. Australia is a nation in course 
of rapid self construction, and with the lessons derived from the experience 
of other nations has deliberately chosen the more difl&cult, but perhaps wiser 
and more hopeful, method of nation building. 

In the opinion of the writer the second inherent wealcness of the 
Public Schools Act of 1867 was due to the provision for the continuance 
of State aid to denominational schools. This provision was a relic 
of earlier conditions. Had Australian Governments adopted fi'om the 
beginning the principle of subsidizing local effort on a territorial, 
rather than on an ecclesiastical basis, the history of education in 
Australia might have been widely different. A decentralized system of the 
New Zealand type might have been the result. The other colonies followed 
the example of New South Wales. Taking warning from her history, they 
had not the same difficulties to encounter in dealing with denominational 
competition and ecclesiastical strife of tongues. New South Wales had by 
her own policy favoured the formation of a number of interests whose 



514 Federal Handbook. 



energetic resistance was overcome only after an agitation which embittered 
political life for more than a generation, and culminated in the abolition of 
all State aid to denominational schools. Since 1882 the altered policy has been 
strictly adhered to, but recently a small departure, viewed with much mis- 
giving, has been made from the principle which forbids financial aid to schools 
under ecclesiastical control. By the provisions of the Bursary Endowment 
Act 1912 State bursaries, providing for a continued secondary education, 
may be held at such schools. One main reason for granting this concession 
was the limited number of State secondary schools. To some the con- 
cession seems equitable ; by others it is regarded as a dangerous return to a 
vicious principle. 

The PubUc Instruction Act of 1880 is of great importance in the history 
of education in Australia, since in all essentials it heljjed to determine the 
natm-e of the educational system developed for the next quarter of a century. 
The controversy which produced it had its echoes in all the other colonies 
(as they were then called), and the principles underlying the Act had either 
already become, or soon afterwards became, part of the " common conscious- 
ness " of Parliament, press, and people. Those principles may be sum- 
marized thus . — The teacher became a civil servant ; the school became 
State property ; control meant State control under a responsible Minister ; 
the schools were secularized, religion, when introduced, being taught in an 
undenominational form. The corollary, of course, was that the maintenance 
of the schools and the further development of the system should be a direct 
charge on the national exchequer. These principles have been embodied 
in the systems adopted in all the Australian States, although in Queensland 
local support and partial control still remain in connexion with the ten District 
Grammar Schools of that State. Many of the old questions which excited 
public controversy are now dead. Even if the ideal of a national system 
which shall be free, secular, and compulsory has not been fully attained 
in any State, it expresses the will of the nation. Primary instruction was 
not made free in New South Wales until 1906. High School fees were not 
abolished until 1911. The fee previously paid in the primary schools was 
3d. a week, but exemptions were granted with great liberality. In the other 
States, fees varied from 3d. to 6d. weekly, although in some cases {e.g., 
Queensland) as much as Is. 6d. was charged in the higher grades. Primary 
education is now free in every State in Australia, the last vestige of school 
fees being abolished in Tasmania in 1908. The abolition of the fee system 
was hastened as soon as the Labour party began to make itself felt as a new 
power in political life. 

Compulsory education, in so far as primary instruction is concerned, is 
accepted in principle, but in many cases is far from being fully carried out in 
practice. Western Australia has the highest average attendance in propor- 
tion to enrolment ; New South Wales, the oldest State, has the lowest. In 
Victoria, Queensland, Tasmania, and Western Australia, attendance is 
required on every day on which the school is open. In New South Wales 
and South Australia attendance is required for only 140 days in the year. 
New South Wales makes the least satisfactory provision for securing regular 
attendance. The Act is defective and badly administered, with the results 
which might be expected. Western Australia has a stringent Act which is 



Educational Policy and Development. 515 

Tigorously applied. Victoria has improved its position in recent years, and 
compares favorably with New South Wales, but is still, like all the other 
States, defective when compared with Western Australia, which in this matter, 
as in several others, has shown an example of highly efficient administration. 
It is to be noted that throughout Australia the increase in average attendance 
does not keep pace with the natmal increase of the population of school age. 
It is possible to exaggerate the defects of administration where the popula- 
tion is sparsely distributed over an enormous area, and when a large " sluft- 
ing " element exists both in town and country. A fair test of the work wliich 
has been accomplished in primary education may be made by comparing the 
percentages at successive periods of cliildren of school age, able both to read 
and write. In 1861 only 47 per cent, of such children could both read and 
write, while 25 j)er cent, were illiterate. In 1911 the former percentage had 
increased to over 90 per cent., while the totally illiterate had decreased by 
nearly two-thirds. Another test is supplied by the statistics for illiteracy, as 
shown by marriage signatures. In 1861, 24*60 represented the proportion 
of persons signing with marks to total number married. From that date, 
this significantly high proportion steadily decreases, until in 1911 it amounts 
to only 0'55. 

In England, until the recent educational renaissance, the field of public 
interest was mainly occupied by the strife of ecclesiastical politics. The 
" educational question " when it appeared in newspapers meant the 
'" religious difficulty." In Australia, after the storm and stress of early 
controversy, the settled national policy became one of non-sectarian 
instruction in all public schools. It seems unlikely there will be any 
departure from this policy, which was adopted as the natural and inevitable 
outcome of the conditions of Australian life and citizenship. It is difficult, 
however, to ascertain the exact state of the public mind as to the amount 
and quality of the religious instruction to be given in the public schools. 
Efforts are made at intervals, gradually becoming longer, by representatives 
of the various religious denominations to excite public opinion on the subject. 
The general indifference on a question which has been settled by the logic of 
events has been interpreted mistakenly as an indifference to religion itself. 
It may be true that there is, as asserted, a " growing recognition that a purely 
secular education is nationally unsatisfactory," but at the same time the 
majority hold a settled conviction that no return should be made to the former 
system. This was shown by a referendum, taken in 1904, in Victoria, the 
State in which the principle of purely secular instruction is most closely 
adhered to in the public schools. In spite of a most vigorous campaign to 
induce the people of Victoria to vote for a slight alteration, there was a 
decided majority against any interference with the established practice. In 
South Australia a jDortion of Scripture may be read in school by the teacher, 
if the parents so desire, but the reading must be " without note or comment." 
In the other States provisionis made forreligiousinstruction within school hours 
by the regular teacher, but it is difficult, from the references made to the 
subject in the inspectors' reports, to pronounce on the quantity and quality 
of the formal religious instruction given. In some cases {e.g., Tasmania) the 
main emphasis is placed on Scripture history and geography. In New South 
Wales and also in Queensland and Western Australia, the range of formal 



516 Federal Handbook. 



instruction is broader. The formal religious instruction, as given in the public 
schools ol New South Wales, represents perhaps the utmost limit which can be 
conceded without turning teachers into exponents of special doctrines of 
religious faith. The various Protestant denominations have expressed their 
satisfaction with the existing system, and make only a limited use of the per- 
mission granted to clergymen to give special religious instruction in the public 
schools during regular school hours. In New South Wales one hour is allotted, 
in Victoria half-an-hour, to religious instruction given within the school bv 
persons other than the official teachers. It need hardly be added that in no 
case is a pupil compelled to attend such special religious instruction given 
by representatives of particular forms of faith. The state of the public mind 
on the subject in general seems to be as follows : —With general recognition of 
the importance of religion as an element in national life, the warnings of the 
past, both in Australia and in other countries, are accepted as a salutary lesson 
for the future. Refusal of all State recognition to particular forms of belief 
is the silent or outspoken prenuss which de facto and de jure forbids any 
attempt at reactionary legislation. The belief in division of labour in things 
spiritual, as in things temporal, leaves to the church and the parents the duty 
of providing for what is not the business of the secular authorities, doctrinal 
instruction in matters of religious faith. The Roman Catholic church, how- 
ever, does not believe in the separation in the education of the young of the 
spiritual and the secidar. It denies that in the absence of definite dogmatic 
teaching a residuum of undenominational belief can be retained, sufficient 
to supply tke sanctions whicb are necessary for public morality, more especially 
for the morality of the young. To the Catholic authorities a system of edu- 
cation forms one whole, the elements not being separable. The position of 
the Roman Catholic authorities is a simple and logical one, and in face of the 
State's action they feel compelled to adopt a non possumus attitude. The 
only reply of the State is a similar non possumus. There can be no compro- 
mise between ideals which are so opposed in theory and in practice. In the 
presence of the impasse thus created, public opinion in Australia and the 
Roman Catholic authorities adopt opposite and apparently irreconcilable 
alternatives. The State, with its traditions of fi-eedom and non-interference, 
allows the Roman Catholic chiuch, or any other religious body, to conduct 
schools in which children may be educated according to the wishes of the 
parents. For the good of the community, it establishes publ.'c schools at 
the common cost. For the good of the whole it may insist, and does insist 
in some States, on the registration of non-State schools and teachers, and 
on the inspection of non-State schools, so far as secular instruction is concerned. 
But there is no indication that the States will advance a step beyond these 
limits. It is only in the absence of a fully organized public secondary school 
system that certain concessions have been made by granting a limited 
number of bm'saries tenable at non-State secondary schools, and it does not 
seem probable that such concessions will be extended in the future. On the 
other hand, the Roman Catholic authorities decline to modify their attitude. 
So far as their own schools are concerned, they maintain the policy of no 
surrender, and strive with great and praiseworthy energy to increase the 
number of their schools, to improve their methods of teaching, and ensure 
the pedagogic training of the teachers. But, in recent years, in sympathy 



Educational Policy and Development. 517 

with a corresponding movement in the United States ot America, the Roman 
Catholic authorities in Australia have vigorously re-asserted their claim to 
State subsidy on the grounds of public equity and what they denounce as 
unfair taxation. Roman Catholic citizens are taxed for an education system 
in the advantages of which they cannot share, and have, in consequence, to 
tax themselves a second time for the support of their own separatist 
schools. 

Before dealing with this argument, it may be noted that the alleged general 
dissatisfaction with the public school system is not borne out by statistics of 
school attendance. Diuing the period 1901-1911 the increased average 
attendance at private schools of all classes throughout the Commonwealth 
has not in a single year been as much as 3,000. The increase in the average 
attendance in the public schools of the Commonwealth during the same period 
has been 113,000, a figure only 19,000 behind the total average attendance at all 
private schools in the Commonwealth in 1911. 

Among private schools it is probably only the Roman Catholic which are 
permanently maintaining an increase in the number of pupils in attendance. 
In New South Wales, where the separatist policy of the Roman Catholic 
church has been most vigorously pursued, the percentage of Catholic children 
attending the public schools compared with the total number of children in 
attendance fell from 11 '48 to 10-98 (1901-11), a very slight decrease when 
the activity of the church propaganda is taken into account. The corrc: 
spending percentage of attendance at Roman Catholic schools rose during 
the same period from 15*15 to 16 "30. It is estim.ated that, at present, for 
every 60 Roman Catholic children attending their own denominational 
schools, there are 40 attending the public schools. A fair proportion of 
Roman Catholics are employed as public school teachers, and a number of 
inspectors and higher officials of the Department of Public Instruction belong 
to the Roman Catholic church. Within the Departments the religious question 
has never been the cause of friction or serious embarrassment. Indeed, the 
social and political life of Australia is singularly free from the bigotry and 
intolerance which is unfortunately so common in some other countries. Anti- 
clericalism never raises its head except when an occasional aggressive note is 
sounded in sonie unguarded ecclesiastical allocution. 

The demand for the State support of Roman Catholic schools on 
the ground of equity appears to the writer to be more specious than 
real. What no doubt is felt as a real grievance is the additional 
burden which the Roman Catholic parent has to shoulder for the 
privilege granted him of standing outside the national system. Like 
every citizen, he has to contribute to public services for the common good, 
in the advantages of which he will not directly participate. No body of 
individuals within the State can justly demand, simply on the ground of 
coascientioiLS refusal to avail themselves of the common sj^stem, to be sub- 
sidized from the common purse for services which they undertake in religion, 
education, or any other sphere of public effort. It is only the size of the 
Roman Catholic minority which differentiates its claim in this respect from 
a similar claim on the part of any other section of the community wliich 
might make conscientious scruples a plea for public support. The Roman 
Catholic minority is not increasing relatively to the rest of the population. 



618 Federal Handbook. 



During the last decennial period, the Presbyterian church population in- 
creased at a rate nearly twice, and the Church of England population at a 
rate nearly thrice, that of the Roman Catholic church. The total increase of 
the Roman Catholic population (1901-1911) was 70-805. The total increase 
•of the " Christian " population during the same period was 647 •965. 

Tliis religious difficulty is the only shadow on the fair prospect of Austra- 
lian national education. Yet there need be little fear of a national policy 
which has become an integral part of the national consciousness being radi- 
cally altered in principle, although it may be occasionally menaced by an. 
accidental political combination, which would in all likelihood meet with 
swift and sure punishment at the polls. The position of the overwhelming 
majority who are opposed to the Roman Catholic demands may be briefly 
stated as follows : — The Roman Catholic education, by admission of the 
ecclesiastical authorities, is one and indivisible. The teachers in their schools 
are, for the greater number, clerical and unsalaried. In effect, to give grants 
of public money to Roman Catholic schools on the ground that they provide 
adequate secular instruction would be to subsidize a religious corporation 
and a body of clerical teachers at the expense of the majority, who disapprove, 
in varying degree, of State aid to religious corporations in any form, direct 
or indirect. The objection is not to the teaching of the Catholic doctrine, or 
to denominational education, but to a claim for privileged treatment. Such 
a claim not merely conflicts with the accepted national policy, but is dis- 
allowable on grounds of a deeper equity than the arithmetical and abstract 
equality of treatment demanded by the chujch in order to lighten the burden 
of a tax which is self-imposed. 

The outward form of the organization of primary school education in 
Australia has now been described in broad outline. The space given to the 
educational history of New South Wales is due to the fact that, until the 
middle of the nineteenth century, the parent colony was almost identical with 
Australia, and that, after that date, the educational history of the other colonies 
followed parallel lines of development. The difficulties were the same, and 
were created by similar conditions. The remedies adopted were the same, 
half measures half-heartedly applied. From beginning to end there is a 
continuous and consistent evolution, both in principle and practice. 
Neglecting minor differences, due to variation in local conditions and mental 
outlook, the stages in the evolution may now be briefly summarized. In 
the earliest period of settlement education was left, in accordance with British 
tradition, to the parent or clergyman as a matter in which the State was not 
directly concerned. The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign 
Parts deserves the credit of having taken the first step (1792) towards sup- 
plying schools and teachers. A church was turned into a school, four teachers 
■were subsidized by the Society, and a clergyman was placed in control as 
superintendent. In Tasmania, as in New South Wales, the early schools 
were, for the most part, under direct control of the local authorities of the 
Church of England. Very soon, the other denominations took part in the 
task, and for many years the only education available was that supplied by 
the church schools, supplemented by a few private but generally inefficient 
institutions. In course of time, the necessity of organization was felt, partly 
-on educational, partly on financial grounds. 



4 



Educational Policy and Development. 519 



The second stage was the appointment of Boards of Education, charged 
with the oversight and partial control of the existing schools, and the duty 
of extending the system In some cases there were two boards, Government 
and denominational. In such cases the conflict of interests soon produced 
friction. The interests of the various denominations were sufficiently alike 
to arouse common action, and Eoman Catholics united with Anglicans and 
Nonconformists in order to secure as much government money as possible. 
The problem of distribution was settled on a simple arithmetical basis, and 
there was practically no government control over teachers, school buildings, 
or curriculum. In this stage, fitful attempts were made to stimulate local 
efEort and responsibility, but for reasons already given the policy of 
centralization soon took entire possession of the field. 

The third stage began by substituting for competitive boards single 
national councils (or their equivalents), which took over the greater number 
of denominational schools. This stage ended with the definite establishment 
of parliamentary control, under a Minister and Department of Public Instruc- 
tion, and with the cessation of all State aid to private and denominational 
schools. Victoria was tiie first colony to inaugurate the new system in 1872. 
Acts to the same effect became operative in Queensland in 1875, and in South 
Australia in 1878. New South Wales, where delay was caused by the greater 
strength of opposing interests, followed in 1880. Tasmania did not come 
into line with development on the continent until 1893. Western Australia, 
after a long period of stagnation, developed in a very few years a national 
•system of education which compares favorably with those of the older 
States, but it was not until 1893 that the Act of Public Instruction was passed, 
while aid to assisted schools was not abolished until 1895. 

The fourth and present stage in the educational history of Australia is 
that of reform and reconstruction. Various amending Acts of Parliament 
have modified and enlarged the outward framework of the educational system, 
and great changes have been made in methods and aims, with a view to 
obtaining better results than were possible under the old sterootyped system 
of examination and inspection, borrowed from English procedure, and brought 
to a degree of mechanical completeness which fostered the illusion that we 
had " the best and best administered primary educational system in the 
world." The fact is that with the passing of the various Acts of Public 
Instruction, and (except for the Roman Catholics) the practical disappearance 
of the religious difficulty, the general impression was that the whole educa- 
tional problem luid been solved, and that all that remained was the labour 
of careful administration by competent officials. Judged by the prevailing 
standards, the system worked well. It was the standards which were at 
fault. Teachers, inspectors, and administrators were being transformed into 
self satisfied officials. Inspectors' reports were expurgated and edited, until 
they were reduced to a common level of dull official routine. The annual 
departmental reports convoyed no information and supplied no enlighten- 
ment on the real defects of the national system. As statistical documents 
they satisfied Parliament and the press. As educational reviews, their value 
was negligible. The public was, in the main, indifferent. It looked on 
subjects and methods of school instruction as things somehow ordained in 
Heaven and sanctificsd by use and wont. Parliament, the religious question 



520 Federal Handbook. 



having been shelved, had not yet come to regard educfition as a political 
question at all. The teachers were subjected to a severe course of discipline, 
which made discussion of vital edacational questions " disloyal " interference 
with the settled policy of the department. Above all, the men in charge of 
the administration had been trained within the system, and were apparently 
unable to grow beyond the system. Their minds moved within a closed 
circle. The pupil teacher system was made the sole avenue of admission to 
the service, which was guarded by a rigid Public Service Act from any intru- 
sion of fresh blood. As a prominent politician put it, the service was sufiering 
from in-breeding. According to the verdict of a foreign expert on education 
who visited the co.untry, the " pupil teacher mind " dominated the system 
from top to bottom. 

Various circumstances combined to disturb and finally destroy the general 
public and oflS.Gial satisfaction. The severest criticism came from within 
Australia itself, from a few voices crying in the educational desert. But 
such criticism might have been inefiectual if changes in economic ' and 
political conditions had not co-operated to rouse the public mind to the need 
for reform. There comes a time in the development of a young country 
when systematic and scientific organization must take the place of rough and 
ready happy-go-lucky methods of exploiting the national resources. In- 
creasing differentiation of occupations brings a demand for increasing difieren- 
tiation of training. The cosmopolitan struggle for trade makes each country 
a competing unit, and raises the standards of effective production and dis- 
tribution. Protectionist policies indirectly contributed to force the question 
of the internal organization of economic supply and demand on public atten- 
tion. The Labour Party began to shake itself free from its earlier narrowness 
of outlook, and with the responsibilities which came ■with greater power, 
showed a saner and more comprehensive appreciation of the problems of 
national education. No governments in Australia have been more ambi- 
tious in their educational aims, or more liberal in expenditure on national 
education, than the Labour govenmients which have been in power in New 
South Wales and South Australia. And in all the States, the Labour Party 
has been educated out of the old jealousy of higher schools and universities 
as exclusive and privileged institutions for the wealthier classes. It was 
probably the economic motive, more than any other, which induced the 
Legislatures to give a sympathetic hearing to the demand for educational 
reform. Individual and national " efficiency " was declared, in Australia 
as in England, to be the one thing needful. The public, which dearly loves 
a phrase, took up the cry. Politicians followed like hounds on the scent. 
The national system of education with its almost entire lack of co-ordination, 
was criticised in the press, the parliaments, and on platforms, with the same 
exaggeration with which it had been previously lauded. The most effectivfr 
campaign originated in Victoria, where parliamentary neglect and inefficient 
administration had combined to block progress during the closing period of 
the last century. Victoria had been passing through a lengthened period of 
economic stress, as the aftermath of a succession of " booms," and a ruthless 
policy of retrenchment was applied in the department which could least afford 
it. In the last year of the century, a Royal Commission was appointed which 
laid bare the glaring defects of the existing administration. The first effect 



i 



Educational Policy and Development. 521 

was to educate the public mind to the need for radical reform in methods 
and organization. Later, a number of reforms were initiated, more particu- 
larly in connexion with the training of teachers, methods of school inspection, 
manual training in schools, and the preparator}' steps for a system of technical 
education, varied according to local needs, and with special reference to 
agricultural industries. The period of economic stress in Victoria came to an 
end, but it cannot be said that Victorian education has progressed according 
to the hopes raised by the Report of the Royal Commission. Much of what 
has been accomplished is due in the first place to the courage and intelligence 
of the Chairman of the Commission, the Hon. Theodore Fink, and afterwards 
to the energy and enthusiasm of the present Director of Education. But 
nearly every educational reform in Victoria has been won after a long fight 
with forces of reaction and prejudice, and with the short-sighted policv 
which would limit free education to the meagre requirements of the 
traditional primary school subjects. The battle for the new education 
has, however, been fought and won at least in principle, and the only 
objections which are now valid are based on arguments which appeal to the 
pockets rather than to the hearts and heads of the people of Victoria. 

In New South Wales, the resistance to reform on the part of the officials 
of the Department collapsed after a brief but lively period of public con- 
troversy. Throughout Australia the weakness of the personnel of the various 
departments became manifest when called upon to defend the system which 
had been built up with meticulous care for generations. One of the gravest 
defects of the old order appeared in the fact that although it abounded in 
excellent officials, it produced no men of striking personality, who left anv 
impress on the educational life of the commvmity. One exception should be 
made, in justice to the honoured memory of J. A. Hartley, who presided 
over South Australian education from 1876 imtil his lamented death in 1896. 
Western Australia owes much to the fortunate acquisition of Mr. Cyril Jack- 
son (now of the London County Council), who for several years acted as head 
of the Education Department and inaugurated there a S5'-stem which in some 
respects is still ahead of those of the Eastern States. Recent changes have 
brought to the front a number of men of high capacity, under whose guidance 
the various State systems of education are in process of rapid transformation. 
In New South Wales, a complete change was made in the higher ranks of 
the governing staff, following on the Report of the Commission of 1902. The 
Government had refused to grant the public demand for a Royal Commission 
of investigation, but appointed two Commissioners to travel for a year in 
other countries, and report on such improvements in education as 
might be found desirable. The general opinion of the authorities seemed to 
be that wnth a few " borrowings " here and there, the situation might be 
saved and criticism silenced. One of the Commissioners was an officer of the 
Department, the other was a University lecturer. The former, Mr. Turner, 
gave special attention to technical education, the latter, Mr. Knibbs (now 
Commonwealth Statistician), produced an encyclopajdic report, which 
covered the whole educational field, and in effect led to the entire surrender of 
the policy of passive resistance on the part of the Minister of Public Instruc- 
tion and the chiefs of the Department. In face of the educational debacle 
there could be no questions of half measures. The history of education in 



522 Federal Handbook. 



New South Wales -from that time to the present has been a record of con- 
sistent, and on the whole successful, attempts to construct a flexible, coherent, 
and comprehensive national system, which should correspond to the economic 
and political ideals of the people. 

As usual, when reforming ideals take possession of a community, measures 
were advocated with a zeal not according to knowledge. The " faddists " 
rose to the occasion, and tlie public was bewildered by the number of fantastic 
schemes for bringing into existence an educational millennium. British 
sanity can generally be trusted when the question becomes one of practical 
construction. The whole history of educational development in Australia 
from the earliest beginning shows the application of ideas and methods which 
we share with the mother country. We have the same qualities and the 
same defects of the qualities. Sometimes we are a little ahead, sometimes a 
little behind, England in readiness to receive new ideas and to apply them 
systematically. But in the main, our educational development has taken place 
on British lines. The first settlers brought with them the English mind and 
temperament. The Australians of to-day are morally, intellectually, and 
politically in all essentials one with the parent stock. Over 95 per cent, of 
the population are of British birth or descent. Physical distance is discounted 
by the continuous and growing spiritual intercourse which exists between 
the two peoples. Sidere mutato, mens eadem. 

If the " faddists " had been listened to, Australian educational reform 
would have been either a business of incongruous patchwork, or an importa- 
tion of a system alien from the social and political character and ambitions 
of the Australian people. We were recommended to borrow this or that item 
from other systems, or else to adopt in its entirety this or that foreign system,, 
for preference, French, Grerman, or American. In face of the chaos of opinions, 
the reconstruction went on steadily on the lines of a development consistent 
with the actual national conditions. From the first, the organizers of the new 
system showed a sane consciousness of the difference between the things 
which could, and the things which could not, be borrowed. We may borrow,, 
or rather imitate, certain ideals of foresight and forethought, scientific 
method, and thoroughness. We may learn from older countries the impera- 
tive necessity of special training for special fimctions, and in general the 
importance of systematic co-ordination of the various grades and depart- 
ments of national education, hitherto left unattached in a traditional but 
perilous independence. Further, there are certain methods and schemes 
which we may borrow from other comitries, where a similar economic situa- 
tion has produced similar results. 

There need be no hesitancy or confession of weakness in such borrowings. 
One salient instance is the problem of continuation schools. Tlie first and 
thoroughly English attitude was to be content with instituting evening 
classes for the benefit of those who had failed to profit by the general educa- 
tion afforded in the primary schools. Tired day-school teachers repeated 
with the same method the same instruction to tired evening pupils. The 
changed economic conditions of modern civilization have made the continua- 
tion school problem one of vital national, and cosmopolitan interest. It is 
a problem in which a number of varying interests converge, very difficult ta 
reconcile, the interests of parent, pupil, apprentice, workman, employer, trade- 



Educational Policy and Development. 523 

unionist, and capitalist. No nation can afford to neglect experiments made 
by other nations, rivals, and possible antagonists in tlie cosmopolitan and 
competitive struggle. 

At the same time, granting the necessity as well as the wisdom of a policy 
of borrowing from other nations in these and other important matters, the 
education of every community is carried on under certain definite social and 
political conditions which must be taken into account in constructing the 
frame work of the educational scheme, in determining the curriculum of 
studies, and the organic relation of the various grades of teachers and schools. 
In most of these respects, Australian social and political conditions are different 
from those of Germany or even England. A system of high schools, on the 
model of the great English public schools, would be an exotic in Australia, 
although we may "borrow" some of their ideals. More than half of the 
expenditure on English education was last year (1912) drawn from local 
rates. As compared with the Australian centralized system, with the State 
as unit for taxation and administrative purposes, there are in England at 
present 1,196 authorities of one kind or another, with varpng powers of 
rating and controlling different grades of education. The gap between 
various classes of schools and teachers corresponds to English social distinc- 
tions which do not exist to anything like the same extent in Australia. Aus- 
tralians have no desire to see such distinctions intensified by an undemocratic 
organization of public schools. Germany, with its many lateral cleavages 
in the structure of society is a warning rather than an example to Australians. 
We decline to import any system which we believe would make for exclusive 
caste distinctions between schools, pupils, or teachers. The ideal of special 
training for special functions is not inconsistent with a unitary organic scheme 
of national education in which the democratic features of freedom of access 
to the highest positions, and freedom of promotion by merit and proved 
capacity, will be preserved and strengthened. 

With all respect to the excellent work accomplished in the other Australian 
States, the existing scheme of organization in New South Wales represents 
the high-water mark of Australian educational endeavour. New South Wales 
has still some serious defects to remedy in regard to which she can afford to 
take lessons frona other States, but, on the whole, her present system pron^ises 
to fulfil what has already been defined as the requirement of an efficient 
national system of education, that it shall be flexible, coherent, and compre- 
hensive. By the generosity of the Government of New South Wales, the 
Department of Public Instruction is being enabled to put the new scheme 
into effective operation. It only requires a continuance of that generosity 
for the system to be brought to full and beneficent fruition. 

The total expenditure on education in New South Wales for 1912 (ex- 
cluaing technical and university education) was £1,572,000. Popidation 
(1911), l,fiJG,7'J4. In justice to some of tlie other States, especially Victoi'ia 
and Queensland, it should be stated that the reforming movement in those 
States coincided with the close of a period of financial stringency. The net 
cost per scholar in average attendance in the Commonwealth was £(5 16s. 5d. 
in 1911, as compared with £4 9s. 3d. in 1901, a significant advance. The 
average cost per scholar in the various States in 1911 was :— New South 
Wales, £7 12s. 5d. ; Victoria, £G 9s. Ud. ; Queensland, £5 15.s. lOd. ; South 



524 Federal Handbook. 



Australia, £6 Is. 2d. ; Western Australia, £8 6s. lOd. ; Tasmania, £5 lis. 2d. 
The total expenditure on all forms of educative effort in the Commonwealth 
has increased from 13s. 4d. per head of the population in 1907-8 to 16s. 7d. 
per head in 1911-12. 

It is impossible within the limits of this article to do more than sketch 
the general nature of the reformed system of education which, with certain 
necessary variations in detail, is now the common ideal in process of realiza- 
tion in all the Australian States. Rousseau, in his Emile, described in broad 
outline the modern programme of primary instruction. Emile was to be 
taught reading, writing, and arithmetic, singing and drawing, national history, 
orally and by narrative, and the principles of natural (imdenominational) 
religion. Practical information was to be imparted by object lessons, and 
careful attention given to physical and technical training. Advances made 
during the last half century have been mainly in educational methods and 
in the surrender of the traditional teaching of subjects, as separate and inde- 
pendent, in favour of an organic scheme of instruction based upon certain 
central interests. The three R's ceased to be treated as ends in themselves, 
and became instruments of mental development. Correlated groups of 
subjects have been made the basis of classification, instead of single subjects, 
or the sum of separated subjects. Such a reformed scheme provides what 
did not exist before, rational centres of gravity for school work, and obvioxisly 
implies a radical change in methods of teaching, classifying, examining, and- 
inspecting. Within the limits laid down by general programmes of instruc- 
tion, the freedom and independence of the teacher are encouraged and 
rewarded, instead of being discouraged and fettered as imder the old system of 
formal examination of classes and pupils, with its dominating principle of 
testing for results which could be statistically expressed. The inspector 
ceased to be an examining machine. The teacher ceased to be a teaching 
machine. What was not sufficiently pro\dded for in the first attempts at 
reform was (a) the necessary reconstruction of the curriculum by an appro- 
priate grouping and co-ordination of subjects, and a clear exposition of the 
new educational aims and methods ; (6) the difficulties attending a quick 
change from a system governed by use and wont and mechanical 'methods, to 
a system entailing a high degree of culture and spontaneous initiative. A great 
army of iiistructors cannot change their methods in a year in response to the 
summons of a Department. The key of the whole educational position lay 
as it always lies, in the training of the teacher. But this was just the part 
of the system which had been most neglected in the past. In only one or 
two of the States was there even a Training College, where some of the better 
qualified pupil teachers were enabled to remedy the defects of a primary 
school education, but received no professional training which deserves the name. 

In the circumstances, three things were absolutely necessary — (1) The 
drawing up of a new programme of school instruction in accordance with the 
new ideals. This was done in the various States in difierent degrees of in- 
telligence and completeness. Victoria was ahead of the other States in this 
respect, although Mr. Cyril Jackson had already done good work in the more 
limited field of Western Australia. (2) New methods of selecting and train- 
ing future teachers. The pupil teacher system was doomed to disappear 
sooner or later. It had been maintained in existence so long mainly because 



Educational Policy and Development. 525 

It. was a cheap and easy means of obtaining a supply of raw material for th" 
ser\'ice. It is still maintained in a modified form in one or twc States. In 
Victoria, where in the strife between economic and educational ideals the 
latter have generally suffered, the good intentions of the heads of the De- 
partment nave been partially frustrated by the lethargy of the State Par- 
liament. The pupil teacher system still exists in Victoria, although shorn of 
its worst defects by the provision of High School training for candidates. 
A Training College (residential) in connexion with the University in great 
measure fulfils the demands of a professional training school. The Principal 
of the College is also Lecturer on Education at the Melbourne University, and 
both University and Department co-operate in raising the standard of scho- 
lastic requirements and the status of the teaching profession. Provision is 
also made for training secondary school teachers. In no other State has so 
much attention been given to the Summer School and other cognate means 
of assisting acting teachers to improve themselves in the technique of their 
profession. In South Australia for some years the training of the future 
teacher has been conducted by Adelaide University in co-operation with the 
Education Department. An efficient Training College exists at Perth, in 
Western Australia, and there is one, on a smaller scale, at Hobart, Tasmania. 
In Queensland the pupil teacher system has endured longer than elsewhere, 
but, with the recent establishment of the University of Brisbane, a new spirit 
has been roused in the northern State. The old examination plus drill system 
of training teachers will soon disappear, to be replaced by a system somewhat 
similar to that existing in South Australia. In New South Wales the pupil 
teacher has almost vanished from the land. Probationary students are 
selected by examination at a standard which presupposes a three years' 
course of education beyond the primary school. Successful candidates 
receive a free and assisted secondary and vocational training at High Schools. 
The ordinary course at the Teachers' College lasts two years, but a one-year 
course is also provided, qualifying for the third-class certificate. Third and 
fourth year courses are open to selected students. Supplementary evening 
courses are also provided for acting kindergarten and infant school teachers. 
It is hoped that the standard for entrance to the college will soon be made 
equivalent to a University matriculation. Qualified students receive free 
education at the University, and are encouraged to proceed to a degree. The 
Principal of the College is also University Professor of Education. The 
College has a staff of over 30 lecturers, the gi-eat majority being University 
graduates. To provide for the requirements of the smaller rural schools, a 
six months' course of training is given in a separate building. A course of 
training for secondary teacheis is also provided, and the University gives a 
Diploma of Education to graduates. The College offers annually two travel- 
ling scholarships of the value of £200 each. The Sydney Teachers' College 
can stand comparison with the best similar institutions in Great Britain. 
One serious qualification must be made. The work of the College is carried 
on under most discouraging conditions. The buildings are quite unsuitable, 
limited in accommodation, deficient in equipment, and situated in one of the 
most insanitary districts of the city. 

The third thing necessary was that Departments of Public Instruction 
should come to the aid of the great body of teachers in the difficult years of 
U. 12154. 2l 



526 Federal Handbook. 



transition from the old system to the new. In all the States, the inspectors 
were encouraged to sink the official examiner in the sympathetic co-operator. 
District classes were formed for demonstration lessons and discussion. 
Teachers were brought into closer intercourse with each other and with the 
oflScers of the Department, and generally a new educational and progressive 
spirit made itself manifest. Full and detailed programmes of instruction 
with an abundance of illustration have been published by most of the Depart- 
ments, but in no State with so much fullness and intelligent supervision as in 
Victoria. In course of time much of this guidance will be unnecessary, but 
for some years it will be absolutely essential, and it is hoped that the educa- 
tional authorities in the other States will imitate the excellent example given 
by the Victorian Department of Public Instruction. 

In the reorganization of school work, special attention has been paid to 
the training of infant school teachers and the adoption of kindergarten 
methods. Kindergarten principles had been previously recognised as a matter 
mainly of book study. Under the old Departmental rule the foolish notion 
prevailed that all that was necessary in order to introduce new subjects or 
methods was to frame an official note or regulation. When public attention 
was called to some defect in the system, the Department replied with a few 
meagre instructions to teachers, and the reform was supposed to be accom- 
plished. No adequate care was taken to provide trained instructors in the 
new subjects. Much of the kindergarten manual training and science teach- 
ing in the primary schools received, and deserved, the severest condemnation. 
The Free Kindergarten Union (first in New South Wales and afterwards in 
other States) established training schools and colleges for teachers, and their 
efforts and success stimulated the Departments to remedy the defects of the 
existing official system. In all the States considerable advance has been 
made in the lower grades of primary education by the elaboration of kinder- 
garten and allied methods. In the teachers' colleges in Sydney and Mel- 
bourne much good original work has been done in child study, and in adapt- 
ing methods Avhich threatened to become stereotyped and mechanical to 
Australian conditions and the requirements of modern scientific psychology. 
In Sydney, both at the teachers' college and at the training college of the Free 
Kindergarten Union, the principles of the Montessori system are now being 
made the subject of experimental application by special teachers, some of 
whom have been trained at the Montessori institutions in Italy. 

In manual training the old plan of employing an intelligent mechanic to 
teach the boys the use of tools was replaced in Victoria by the introduction of 
Sloyd methods under competent trained instructors, supervised by an in- 
structor of manual training imported from England. In no other State does 
systematic manual training form so integral a part of school work. In 
science teaching Victoria again led the way by adopting improved methods 
of nature study as a preparation for more direct instruction in elementary 
science. In all the States science is taking a much more prominent place in 
the school curriculum than before, although development is delayed by meagre 
school requirements and lack of properly qualified teachers. The increased 
importance attached to the teaching of science in schools has been partly due 
to the public recognition of its close connexion \vith the progress of the national 
industries, and partly to the recognition of the pedagogic value of science as 



Educational Policy and Development. 527 

an iastrumeut of mental and moral training. We need, however, to be con- 
tinually reminded of Huxley's warning that no teaching of science is worth 
anything as a mental discipline which is not based on a direct study of the 
facts and a practical exercise of the observing and logical faculties. 

In reaction from the old formal training with its false division of the curri- 
culum into separate subjects, treated independently, exaggerated emphasis 
has been laid on the necessity of " vocational " training. In the less (educa- 
tionally) developed States, vocational training in the primary and superior 
schools has, for the greater part, taken the form of an amateurish introduc- 
tion of certain " occupations " as subjects of school study. But in all the 
States, the guiding principle is being recognised that unless in special schools 
the vocational must be subordinated to the educational end. The choice of 
subjects will no doubt be in part determined by the dominant local interests, 
but it is not enough that the school curriculum should reflect the environment. 
It is the task of the public school education to enlarge and emich the spiritual 
envdronment of the pupil, and subjects and methods must not be such as to 
encourage a dangerous and premature narrowing of interests. At the same 
time, since the great majority ol the pupils pass at once from the life of the 
primary school to the life of the field, factory, shop, or warehouse, the old 
formal training was obviously inadequate. The Victorian Commission on 
Technical Education (1909) wisely began its work, although to the surprise 
of the officials of the Department, by considering how far the primary school 
system was fitted to prepare the pupil for later specialized training and occu- 
pations. " The foundations of the work must necessarily be laid in the 
primary schools, and a wisely regulated course of primary instruction will do 
much to make the work of the technical school easy and to insure its success." 
The recommendations of the Victorian Commission have not been carried 
out in their entirety, but in Victoria and in all the other States, in varying 
degree, there is now in operation a scheme of instruction which provides for 
a reasonable amount of differentiation in the higher grades, and for later 
specialization in continuation schools. 

In 1912 Victoria had nineteen district liigh schools of two types — high 
schools and agricultural high schools. A school farm of not less than 20 acres 
is attached to each agricultural high school. Pupils must be of at least 
twelve years of age, and must have passed the qualifying examination. No 
fees are charged to pupils under fourteen. In these schools there is during 
the first two years an industrial course leading to technical and trade occu- 
pations, and a common course for pupils intending to remain at school for 
four years. Both courses include English language and literature, history 
and civics, mathematics, geography, elementary science, drawing, manual 
work, and physical training. In the common course, a second language is 
optional — Latin, French, or German. Manual training includes woodwork 
and metal work, modelling, agriculture ; and for girls, needlework and cooking. 
At the beginning of the third year, the general course of study is followed by 
special courses each extending over two years, and leading to the teaching 
profession, public service, commercial, agricultural, and higher technical 
pursuits, and to the University. The agricultural high schools are now well 
developed, and they provide an excellent traiixing, both theoretical and 
practical 

2L2 



528 Federal Handbook. 



In New South Wales tlie system is more extensive and complex, and the 
scheme, although still in the tentative experimental stage, is by far the most 
ambitious in Australia. The nature of the organization is shown in the 
accompanying chart. Under the previous system, a number of superior 
public schools (dating from 1880) provided a higher primary instruction. 
These are now in process of being reorganized into superior technical schools 
(32), superior junior or technical schools (21), and superior domestic schools 
for girls (52), the type of school being determined by local needs. In addi- 
tion, 48 evening continuation schools have been established — 31 in the metro- 
politan area, and 17 in country districts. Of these 22 are junior technical, 18 
commercial, 7 domestic, and 1 preparatory. High schools, providing secondary 
education, have been increased in numter from five to twelve. For admis- 
sion to all these scliools, a qualifying certificate is necessary, showing that the 
candidate has completed a full primary course. After a two years' course at 
any of the higher schools, qualified pupils may proceed to a further two years' 
course (16-18) at the high school, technical central college, advanced evening 
continuation schools, or Hawkesbury Agricultural College. Candidates who 
obtain the leaving certificate at the end of a four years' course may proceed 
to the University, teachers' college, or to advanced classes at the technical 
college. The principle of free education prevails throughout the greater part 
of this scheme, fees being charged only in the highest grades. Liberal pro- 
visions are made for bursaries and scholarships. In 1912, 300 State bursaries 
(£10 — £-30 yearly for two years) and 514 scholarships (free instruction and text 
books) were awarded. Intermediate technical scholarsliips (£25) were also 
awarded, entitling the holders to a free three years at the technical or agri- 
cultural colleges. Intermediate scholarships (50) were awarded, tenable for 
a further two years' high school course. Probationary student scholarships 
(88) enabled candidates for the teaching profession to complete the liigh 
school course. In 1912, there were 560 students attending the teachers' 
college, the greater number receiving allowances of various kinds. The 
total expenditure for such allowances was £18,620. The holders of scholar- 
ships receive free instruction and text books, and are granted allowances of 
£30 if living at home, £50 if living at a distance. Finally, 200 State exhibi- 
tions and scholarships are made available at the University. 

The New South Wales scheme has been described in detail, as it shows the 
nature of the ideals and the correlated system which promise to prevail 
throughout the Commonwealth. In all the other States, the existing system 
is being modified and extended, but with less fullness of detail, and less liberal 
expenditure, than in New South Wales. The need for developing a State 
secondary school system has not been so strongly felt in some of the other 
States, where a number of efficient private secondary schools already existed. 
In Victoria, there is a large number of excellent denominational higher schools 
and colleges. In Queensland, there are ten district grammar schools (six 
boys', four girls') each of which receives a State subsidy of £1,000 a year, in- 
cluding £250 for the provision of district scholarships. In both States, these 
schools are subject to Government inspection. South Australia has nineteen 
district high schools (State) and at least two denominational grammar schools 
of the best type. Western Australia is establishing continuation classes and 
central schools, subsidizes one high school to the extent of £1,000 a year, and 



Educational Policy and Development. 



529 



Chart showing the General Scheme of Publie Education in New South Wales. 



Kindergarten 

AND 

Infant ScHooi. 
2 Years. 



Primary School 
6 Years. 



QUALIFYING CERTIFICATE, 




Educational Policy and Development. 531 

has now in operation an admirably equipped modern school at Perth, with a 
four years' secondary course, providing both general and specialized instruc- 
tion. Tasmania, owing to the financial loss entailed by her entering the 
Commonwealth, has been rather backm^ard in educational development, but 
is now planning a scheme on lines somewhat similar to those adopted in New 
South Wales. 

Certain weaknesses in the New South Wales scheme may now be noticed. 
Similar weaknesses are to be found in the other States, but, since the system 
of the mother State has received (for reasons mentioned) a prominent place in 
this article, they may now be stated with special reference to that State, the 
oldest and largest in the Commonwealth, which, after a lengthened period of 
educational stagnation, now claims to be in the forefront of modern scholastic 
progress. 

1. The legal minimum school age is six years. The Australian child at 

that age has almost passed the kindergarten period. Although 
the number of children under six years attending State schools 
throughout the Commonwealth was, at last census, nearly 
100,000, the corresponding number in the schools of New South 
Wales was under 10,000, and showed a tendency to decrease. 
No adequate provision is made for kindergarten instruction of 
these children in the State schools, and over 26,000 between the 
ages of five and six receive no school instruction of any kind. 
In these circumstances the free kindergartens are supplementing 
State efiort, and the Governnaent recognises the value of their 
work by an annual grant, £850 of which is devoted to kinder- 
gartens in Sydney. So long as children under six are practically 
excluded from State schools, the free kindergartens, which are 
entirely unsectarian, have a claim to support on educational 
grounds. Little children are often shockingly neglected in the 
poorer districts of the city, where, except for sporadic religious 
effort, the free kindergartens are the only civilizing agencies 
that exist. 

2. The supply of properly trained teachers is not adequate t o the 

demand. A full development of the new system is premature 
and dangerous until there is a fuller recognition of the principle 
of special training for special functions in the higher depart- 
ments. Considerable improvement is noticeable in this respect. 
A generation ago. University graduates were practically ex- 
cluded from the Public Service. There are now 264 graduates 
engaged in the various departments of State school work. 

3. The proposed special trade schools exist at present only on paper, 

although one trade school, to cost over £6,000, is in course of 
erection. 

4. Continuation schools are still in the experiment stage. The incon- 

gruous elements in the attendance (ages varying from 11 to 42), 
and the lack of special qualifications on the part of many of the 
teachers, are retarding d(!veIopTucnt. Further, the absence of 
compulsion and the lack of public interest defeat the best efforts 
of the Department. The Australian boy or girl of fourteen has 



532 Federal Handbook. 



not the slightest difficulty in obtaining employment for which 
no training is necessary. The most obvious requirement is that 
the State should regulate the employment of labour under the 
age of 16 or 17, so as to permit attendance at afternoon instead 
of evening classes. In this matter it is good economic, as well 
as good educational, policy to borrow from other communities, 
who, in similar conditions to our own, have been taught by ex- 
perience the need of such compulsory legislation to protect 
children from the results of their own ignorance and from the 
selfishness of parents and employers. 
5. The excellent principle, according to which the State should provide 
higher education only for those who show themselves capable 
of taking advantage of it, is not yet fully adopted in practice. 
From the junior technical school up to the technical college the 
work is hampered by the presence of many unqualified pupils. 
A more vigorous application of the tests for admission is neces- 
sary. But in the actual period of transition from an old sys- 
tem to a new many defects are unavoidable, which may be 
gradually eliminated in the course of development. If reason- 
able allowances are made, the present situation is full of hope 
for the future. 
Technical education has been, until quite recently, in a chaotic condition, 
following the traditions and practice of the mother country. The Univer- 
sities were not directly interested in it. The Education Departments for the 
most part thought their work accomplished, with the provision of a sound 
primary school education. Specialized technical instruction was left in the 
main to private effort. The first impulse towards improvement was due to 
the economic necessity of providing a better supply of skilled labour and 
trained directors of labour. The supply has never been equal to the demand, 
especially in the higher grades. ^Mining was among the first interests con- 
sidered, and the Ballarat School of Mines, founded in 1870, occupies an 
honorable place in the history of technical education in Australia. The 
Sydney Technical College was not established imtil 22 years later, although 
long before that technical classes had been instituted in Sydney. Victoria 
has now four mining schools and a number of fairly successful technical 
schools and colleges. South Australia possesses one Central School of IVIines 
and Industries, and five local mining schools of subordinate importance. 
The rapid progress of Tasmanian mining industry led to the establishment 
of the Zeehan School of ]\Iines and Metallurgy, now affiliated to the University 
of Tasmania. The magnificent and varied natural resources of Queensland 
and the existence of a healthy district competition accomit for the special 
attention given in the northern State to technical training. Queensland has 
now sixteen technical colleges. Western Australia has one Central Technical 
School and about a dozen branch local institutions. In both Queensland 
and Western Australia, technical schools and colleges are now controlled by 
the State Departments of Education, and in both there is a special Director 
or Inspector of Technical Education. In the older States, only the slightest 
attempts were made for many years at co-ordination and control of technical 
training. Large institutions in Sydney and Melbourne were allowed to grow 



Educational Policy and Development. 533 

into monstrous agglomerations of classes and studies. Since tlie end was a 
practical one, tlie " practical man " was usually allowed to dominate the 
situation. Sometimes the eternal struggle between the practical man ignorant 
of theory and the scientific man insufficiently acquainted with practice led 
to successive reversions of the controlling policy. The general result was 
confusion, cross purposes, and wasted opportunities. The more glaring 
faults have now been removed, or are in process of removal. In Victoria, 
the appointment of the Commission on Technical Education (1899) marked 
the beginning of a new era. The various technical schools, hitherto managed 
by local committees or coimcils and subsidized by the State, which had yet 
no effective voice in their control, are being taken over gradually by the 
Department, and a scheme of linkage is now being devised between the liigher 
technical colleges and the district and agricultural high schools. Agricultural 
colleges and experiment farms (described in another article), controlled by the 
Department of Agriculture, exist in each of the States except Tasmania. 
The only comment that may be made concerning them in this article is, that 
the instructors appointed have often been men who, while practically ex- 
perienced, had yet but a minimum of the scientific knowledge and training 
required. With the establishment of University schools of agriculture, this 
undesirable state of affairs will gradually be remedied. 

The expenditure on technical education in Victoria has about doubled in 
the last six years. In Western Australia and New South Wales it has more 
than doubled within the same period. But the fact of such relative increases 
may convey a wrong impression of the general situation, for the total 
expenditure on technical education in the Commonwealth is still less than Is. 
per head of the population, and compares very unfavorably with the amount 
(over 12s. per head of population) spent on primary education. Australia 
falls beliind New Zealand in national expenditure on technical as well as 
secondary education. The Australian public has not yet been roused to 
anything like a full consciousness of its responsibilities, or of the proper place 
which technical education must take in the organization of the national 
system of education. 

The traditional British policy of entrusting ever}i:hing to local boards and 
councils has been a failure in Australia. The policy of subsidy without control 
has also failed. Many are of opinion that the new policy of co-ordination 
and control has not been carried far enough. The Victorian Commissioners 
advocated the appointment of a State Council of Education as a safeguard for 
the maintenance of educational progress. Such a body, it was argued, 
would not in any way lessen or interfere with Parliamentary control or 
Ministerial responsibility. " Its duty would be to study continuously all 
parts of the educational system, from the State school to the University, and 
to report on the reforms introduccid in other countries in all departments of 
instruction." Such a council should contain representatives of all the educa- 
tional interests in the State, and also representatives of all the leading econo- 
mic interests, who should be " chosen, as far as possible, by reason of their 
experience and qualifications in dealing with educational problems." In 
New South Wales a similar proposal has been advocated from time to time, 
but public opinion remains indifferent on the question. Probably the evils of 
defective organization have not yet been sufficiently felt by the Australian 



534 Federal Handbook. 



people, or by leaders of public opinion. In Victoria, a Council of Public 
Education has been recently called into existence by Parliamentary enact- 
ment. The functions of the Coimcil are limited, but effective work has already 
been done especially in connexion with the registration of non-State teachers 
and the inspection of private schools. It is probable that the main reason 
for the appointment of the Council was the limited power allowed to the De- 
partment by the Legislature in the matter of secondary and higher education. 
In the other States, where the Departments of Public Instruction are not 
limited, the need for a National Council has not been so strongly felt as 
in Victoria, where powerful private and denominational interests had to be 
conciliated by the creation of a special Board, on wliich they should be 
directly represented. On the general question of the expediency of a National 
Council of Education, all that need be said is that except to a limited extent 
in Victoria, it does not seem to be within the range of immediate practical 
politics. It will have to wait until the growing complexity of educational 
development makes the problem of effective co-ordination more urgent than 
it is at present. 

Before treating of University education, some notice may be taken of 
three important subjects — the provision made for the education of children 
in the more remote districts, the position of the Australian teacher, and the 
moral and physical training of the Australian pupil. 

The Northern Territory (white population under 2,000) is administered 
by the Commonwealth, which also protects the interests of the aboriginal 
inhabitants. The Federal Government takes no share in education outside 
this limited sphere, except in the control of the Commonwealth Naval and 
Military colleges. In the various states. Native Protection Boards provide 
for the elementary education of aboriginal children. The educational needs 
of the white children in outlying districts led to the early establishment of 
provisional and subsidized schools, which have greatly increased in number. 
Sometimes, instead of opening several small new schools, the better plan, 
economically and educationally, is adopted of conveying the children to the 
school. Western Australia gives " driving grants " when parents live 3 miles 
from the nearest school, and supports over 250 schools, with an attendance in 
each of between ten and twenty children. The Queensland Department pays 
nearly £7,000 a year to itinerant teachers, and nearly £10,000 for provisional 
schools. The average cost of a pupil in a provisional school is greater by 
nearly £1 10s. than the cost of the education of a pupil in an ordinary State 
school. In Tasmania, New South Wales, and other States, the Department 
makes pro\'ision for teaching in localities where an average of ten cannot be 
secured, by subsidizing approved private teachers at a rate not exceeding £5 
per pupil per annum. In 1912 the New South Wales Department spent over 
£17,000 in such subsidies. Arrangements are also made for conducting tem- 
porary schools at railway construction centres and on mining fields. It cannot 
be said that Australia fails in her duty to the children in remote and sparsely 
settled districts. 

The position of a teacher in social and political estimation depends mainly 
on the social value attached to the work performed and on the quality and 
quantity of the prior training required. A plentiful supply of untrained 
teaching labour was in itself almost sufficient to account for the low rates of 



Educational Policy and Development. 535 

remuneration whicli prevailed under previous conditions. \Mien the public 
recognises that the work done is work worth paying for, and that the quality 
of that work is improving, it will be willing to pay teachers more liberally. 
But the ordinary parent, especially among the labouring classes, fails at pre- 
sent to see the intimate connexion between the boy's school work and the 
man's life work. It is not likely that the teacher's remuneration will ever 
correspond to the social value of his function. It hence becomes necessary 
that the State should aid him in two ways, by bearing part of the cost of the 
long preliminary training, and by providing a reasonable pension after a long 
life of honorable and arduous social service. Progress may be noted in both 
these respects. The duty of pensioning civil servants is at least admitted, 
excepting perhaps by the Melbourne press, but some of the superannuation 
schemes are very defective, badly devised, and inequitable in distribution. 
In all the States, greater aid is now given during the preliminary period of 
education and training, but in varying degree. New South Wales has the 
most complete and liberal system. Teachers in the service, who are qualified, 
are allowed to continue their education at the University, and to qualifv for 
a degree in arts or science, without payment of fees. The salaries of teachers 
have been raised considerably in recent years, especially in the lower grades, 
but many qualified adult teachers still receive less pay than an ordinary 
mechanic or dock labourer. There are variations in the standard of 
remuneration in the different States owdng to allowances for house rent, etc., 
but the limits for teachers in charge of schools are £110 and £120 for small 
rural and provisional schools, and £500 for heads of large schools. The 
corresponding limits for women teachers are £110 and £370. Male assistants 
receive from £65 (Tasmania) to £222 (New South Wales). Western Australia 
pays higher average rates than the other States, probably higher than any 
other country in the world, for similar service. Victoria has recently raised 
the salaries of her teachers, but the greatest increase in total expenditure on 
teachers' salaries has taken place in New South Wales. The public school 
teachers in that State increased in number (1902-1912) from 5,401 to 6,559, 
the average attendance from 155,916 to 167,752, the total amount paid in 
salaries and allowances from £644,961 to £1,027,907. Taking a shorter period, 
the total rate of increase on salaries paid to teachers between 1909 and 1912 
has been 27 percent. The greater part of this increase has been probably due 
to the desire, stimulated by Labour legislation, to raise the minimum living 
wage in the lower ranks of the teacliing profession. The democratic jealousy 
of higher salaries for the highest positions is weakening, but it is not likely 
that school work will ever offer the prize positions which are common in other 
professions. Hence the necessity, incumbent on the State, to niake wise 
provision, not only for security of tenure, but also for an equitable svstem of 
retiring allow;mces. 

The physical culture of the Australian pupil receives more intelligent and 
systematic attention than is given in m.ost other countries. It is, no doubt, 
aided by the freer life encour;;ged by Australian conditions. But in the city 
districts the playgrounds are restricted in area, and a "weedy " tj-pe is be- 
coming common, in spite of the tendency to sports, a tendency which is much 
exaggerated in newsp:',pcr writing end travellers' tales. The cadet system, 
school drill, and the compulsory military training are moral as well as physical 



536 Federal Handbook. 



influences for good. Much, however, remains to be done by opening children's 
playgrounds in city districts, and by an enlightened system of town planning. 
The congestion in some parts of the cities, and even in some suburbs, has 
given rise to open sores, which are indicative of past neglect. The municipal 
councils are generally composed of well-meaning business men, who are 
content with a policy sufficient for the day, but who rarely show wise and 
comprehensive foresight for the future. In Sydney, owing to its physical 
conditions and earlier foundation, municipal reform is involving enormous 
expenditure in requital for the sins of the past. The physical condition of 
the Australian children was assumed to be excellent until recent scientific 
investigation rudely dispelled public complacency. Tasmania claims to 
have been the first State to undertake an inquiry into the health of children 
attending State schools. Medical inspectors have now been appointed in all 
the States. They are assisted by specialists and nurses, and the Commonwealth 
Government is preparing a scheme of uniform investigation and classification. 
In Tasmania it has been found that, " speaking generally, the older and 
more isolated the settlement, the greater was the number of defects found in 
the children, and the lower the mortality." In the Hobart district, among 
485 defective children (out of 2,108 examined), 174 were found to be sufiering 
from imperfect vision or diseases of the eyes, 42 from diseases of the ear, 136 
from marked adenoid growth, and 15 from pronounced curvature of the spine. 
(Eeport, 1912.) Queensland has a very thorough scheme of medical inspection 
in operation under competent officers. In Queensland, as in all the other 
States, dental troubles are found present to an extraordinary degree, especially 
among children of the city, while ophthalmia is a threatening evil in the re- 
moter districts. Attention may be drawn to the excellent carrjnng out of the 
Queensland scheme of medical school inspection (for detailed description of 
results, cf. Annual Eeports of Queensland Education Department, 1910-12). 
So far as the general investigation has gone, the results seem to show the same 
defects, and in somewhat the same proportion, wliich exist among the children 
of Europe and America. The disclosures will result, it is to be hoped, in 
greater attention being given to the physical conditions of school life. The 
efforts of both teachers and pupils are grievously handicapped by defective 
structural and hygienic school conditions. And what is wanted is not merely 
better school buildings and furniture, but more light, more air, and more 
soap. 

The results of medical inspection have also given new importance to the 
necessity for special treatment of defective and backward children. In the 
teachers' colleges, the causes of retardation are being systematically studied, 
and the new psychology is coming to the help of those who are dissatisfied 
with the old rough and ready methods of classifying children en hloc. Hitherto 
State Governments have been content with establishing or subsidizing a few 
special institutions (not always under proper scientific educational supervision) 
for the more extreme cases of abnormal children. There is a ^videspread 
indiSerence to the fact that every school contains a certain number of children 
sufficiently abnormal to prevent them from being benefited by the ordinary 
methods of instruction. Such children are serious hindrances to the general 
instruction, besides suffering themselves from undetected and uncared-for 
physical and mental defect. No adequate provision has been made in any 



Educational Policy and Development. 537 

State for the special treatment of such abnormal or partially abnormal school 
pupils, although in one or two instances {e.g., in Victoria) some attention is 
being given to the training of selected teachers for special work. This is 
undoubtedly the necessary prior task before arrangements can be made for 
even the partial segregation of defective pupils in special classes or schools. 
The utmost that can be said at present of Australia is that the various 
Education Departments are only beginning to be dimly aware of a 
nevr field, which calls for urgent investigation and the adoption of new 
methods. 

The moral education of the Australian youth has been unfavorably 
criticised by visitors, who find what they sometimes describe as a lack of 
reverence. This is, in most cases, a facile phrase for explaining to themselves 
an indefinable change in the social atmosphere as compared with that of older 
countries, where the rules of manners as well as of moral duty are imposed 
by tradition and secured by convention and habit. At any rate, the lack of 
reverence, if it exists in Australia, is a social characteristic not peculiai' to 
the Austrahan school boy or girl. An Australian might himself prefer to 
describe it as a lack of servility, and a humorous disregard of social ritual and 
conventions, which do not appeal to his intelligence or his sense of utility. 
Judged by standards which are not merely subjective and individual 
impressions, Australian adult and juvenile morality compares favorably with 
that of other countries. Authorities agree in considering that a fair compara- 
tive test of criminality must be based on tbe number of commitals to higher 
courts, since the total returns from lower courts contain a large number of 
cases which are " merely technical breaches of laws having in some instances a 
purely local significance." Since 1861 , there has been a steady decline in the 
number of commitals in proportion to population, from 22 to 6 commitals per 
10,000 of the population, i.e., a decline of about 73 per cent. The rate of 
convictions for serious crime in the Commonwealth has decreased from 69*3 
per 10,000 persons in 1881 to 24-6 per 10,000 in 1911. The prison population 
of the Commonwealth has decreased from 16 per 10,000 in 1891 to 6 9 per 
10,000 in 1911. 

Much adverse criticism on the public school system seems to be based on 
the assumption that, since dogmatic or sectarian religious instruction is not 
given, the morality of the public school pupil must therefore be lower than 
that of the pupils attending denominational schools. No satisfactory proof 
of this sweeping a priori judgment has ever been given. As in other countries, 
the better private schools and colleges contain a large proportion of pupils 
who come from homes where the standards of refinement are above the 
average. The difference between pupils in such institutions and the majority 
of State school children is a social, rather than a moral, one, and gives rise to 
much confusion of judgment. Those predisposed to attach great importance 
to formal religious instruction in schools naturally claim for such instruction 
the credit of much that, in the opinion of others, is really due to the ordinary 
healthy life of the home and the school. 

The absence of religious instruction of a formal and dogmatic kind from 
the State schools doos not necessarily imply the absence of a moral and 
religious spirit. The exposition of doctrine is technical, not moral or religious, 
and there is great difference of opinion as to the educative value (moral or 



538 Federal Handbook. 



intellectual) of much that is included under formal religious instruction. 
]\Ir. H. G. Wells, turning his attention for a moment from schemes of economic 
and materialistic reconstruction, finds occasion to say that the young par- 
ticularly need to be taught " truthfully and fully all we know of three funda- 
mental things, the first of which is God, the next their duty towards their 
neighbour, and the third, sex. The adequate why of these, and some sort of 
adequate how, make all that matters in education." Australian educators 
are not peculiar in neglecting the importance of instruction in sexual physio- 
logy and psychology, and, so long as the public mind is dominated by the policy 
of absolute reticence, the neglect must apparently remain. The best way of 
introducing the subject in school instruction would perhaps be by collective 
lessons on the lines advocated by the White Cross League. In religion, even 
if dogmatic and sectarian instruction is to be excluded, much is left to the 
teacher, provided he is a person of serious and high convictions. Here again, 
the key to the educational situation is to be found in the training of the teacher, 
in the production of the true educator, who becomes a moral and spiritual 
force in the living community which is the school , and not the mere purveyor 
of certain pabulum of instruction. " Their duty towards their neighbour " 
means, if it means anything beyond the commandments and the conventions, 
a training in civic duty which begins with the life of the school, in initiation 
into Goethe's Three Reverences, reverence for our fellows and equals, reverence 
for those who are wiser and better, and reverence for those who are weaker 
and younger than ourselves. In all the Australian States probably more 
attention is paid in State school teaching to civics, and the principles of a 
sound social morality, than in the non-State schools, where these subjects are 
either neglected or lost sight of in the attention given to ritual, or formal 
religious instruction. In all the programmes of State school education, an 
important place is reserved for systematic instruction in the principles of 
morality and good citizenship by means of text books and carefully prepared 
schemes of lessons. The conception of the true function of the State school as 
a moral and educational instrument may be best stated in words quoted fi'om 
the regulations with regard to inspection and examination, issued by the 
Victorian Department of Education. " Although as a general rule, the 
efl&ciency of the instruction will be measured by the inspector's tests, and by 
the number of pupils who pass the qualifying examination, or who gain the 
certificate of merit, or a scholarship, it should be clearly understood by teachers 
that the inspector's opinion of the worth of the school to the community will 
outweigh the results of examinations. The worth of the school to the com- 
munity consists in the work it does in quickening the mental life of the pupils, 
in forming habits likely to result in worthy character, and in inducing its 
pupils to pass on to a higher type of school, or, before they leave the elementary 
school, to complete the full course. More important than successful acquisi- 
tion of knowledge as revealed by examinations is an affirmative answer to 
such questions as these : — Are the teachers faithful and zealous in their work, 
and are the pupils being systematically practised in earnest, honest endea- 
vour ? Are they being trained to think, to think quickly, and to tliink for 
themselves ? Are they interested in what they are doing, and are they 
being taught to apply it in their out-of-school affairs ? Is their school en- 
vironment calculated to produce a cheerful performance of their duties, a 



Educational Policy and Development. 539 

consideration and respect for the rights of others, and an ideal of honour 
and truthfulness in word and act ? " 

University education in Australia has followed the lines of British de- 
velopment. The State Universities of to-day resemble in many respects the 
great English provincial Universities of Manchester and Birmingham. The 
degrees are, by Royal Letters Patent, declared of equal status with those of 
any other University in the Empire. There are no tests of any kind, save those 
of merit and capacity. They are secular, in so far as no instruction in theology 
is given or theological degrees granted. Women students are admitted, and 
can proceed to degrees. They are all national Universities, in great measm-e 
supported by Parliamentary grants, and the State is represented, directly 
and indirectly, on the governing councils. 

The six Australian Universities vary considerably in size, financial en- 
dowment, and complexity of organization. Sydney (founded 1850) and 
Melbourne (1853) are the oldest and largest. In the years in which these 
Universities began operations, the respective State populations were only 
266,900 and 347,307. When the University of South Australia began work 
in 1876 the State population was slightly over 210,000. The estimated popula- 
tion of Tasmania in 1890, when the University was founded, was only 144,787. 
The two remaining Universities were not founded until within the last year 
or two. Queensland University was formally opened in 1911; State popula- 
tion, 622,129. The University of Western Australia began work a year later ; 
State population (1911), 294,181. The delay in the establishment of Univer- 
sities in the northern and western States was due in the latter case to slow 
national development (the population of Western Australia in 1890 was still 
under 50,000) ; in the former case, to a prolonged period of financial 
depression. 

The number of students attending lectures at the various Universities 
(comparative estimate for 1911) was— Sydney, 1,407 ; Melbourne, 1,129 ; 
Adelaide, 621 ; Tasmania, 147 ; Queensland (opening year), 83. The figures 
for Melbourne and Adelaide do not include students in music. The Univer- 
sity revenues were estimated in 1911 as follows: — Sydney, £69,557 (including 
Government grants, £22,550) ; Melbourne, £67,051 (grants, £28,190) ; Tas- 
mania, £6,930 (grant, £4,500). The new University of Western Australia is 
to receive from Government an annual grant of £13,500. 

Private benefactions also vary in amount. Sydney University has received 
benefactions of a capital value of over half-a-million pounds. Melbourne 
University has received over £160,000, and Adelaide nearly as much. The 
University of Tasmania has practically no private endowment. Sydney 
University library contains 100,000 volumes and 700 serial publications. The 
opposite extreme is found in Tasmania, where the local University library 
contains only 1,800 volumes and 12 serials. 

The organization of the Universities is on familiar British lines. The 
governing body is a small senate or council, with over twenty members. A 
general council (corresponding to convocation) is, in the older Universities, 
composed of graduates only, but in the new Universities of Queensland and 
Western Australia it contains representatives of the national, industrial, 
commercial, and scientific interests, and also donors of sums over £100. The 
general council in some cases has only a deliberative function, in others it 



540 Federal Handbook. 



has powers of revising University legislation. In the constitution of Sydney- 
University, the University is declared to consist as a corporation of the senate. 
The wider point of view appears in the constitution of the University of 
Queensland, which is declared to be " a body corporate consisting of senate, 
council, and graduate and undergi-aduate members." 

The range of studies also follows British precedents, with the addition of 
subjects recognised in American Universities and in some of the newer British 
Universities as fit and proper subjects for University instruction. The 
most complete curriculum exists in operation at Sydney and Melbom-ne. 
Melbourne University has eight faculties — arts, law, medicine, science, 
engineering, agriculture, dentistry, veterinary science (and also a musical 
examination board) — with a stafi of eighteen professors and over 60 lecturers, 
as well as a large number of teachers of music. Sydney has four faculties^ 
arts, law, medicine, and science— with departments of mechanical and elec- 
trical engineering, mining engineering, and metallurgy, economics and com- 
merce, agriculture, veterinary science, dentistry, and miUtary science. The 
Sydney University staff consists of 22 professors and over 100 lecturers. 
Adelaide University gives instruction and grants degrees in arts, law, 
medicine, science, English, and music. It has also a faculty of commerce, a 
department of education, and a conservatorium of music. It has a staff of 
eleven professors and 30 lecturers, not including teachers of music. The Uni- 
versity of Tasmania has four professors and seven lecturers in three faculties of 
letters, science, and law. The new Universities of Queensland and Western 
Australia began with a limited programme, in which the emphasis was laid on 
" utilitarian " rather than on " cultm-e " subjects. But within a year the pro- 
gramme was expanded, and it is probable that both the new Universities 
will repeat the history of Birmingham University, where the liberal studies, 
at first subordinated, were quickly developed into a fully organized faculty 
of arts. The University of Queensland began (in 1910) by establisliing four 
chairs— classics, engineering, chemistry, and mathematics and physics. It 
has now (1913) a faculty of arts with two professors and ten lecturers, a faculty 
of science with one professor and nine lectm'ers, a faculty of engineering, with 
one professor and three lecturers. The University of Western Australia 
began with four professorships — modern literature and history, mathematics 
and physics, chemistry, and engineering and mining — -but has now made addi- 
tional provision for the teaching of classics, philosophy, economics, geology, 
biology, agiiculture, and other subjects. 

Most of the professorships are held by graduates of English and Scottish 
Universities, but a considerable number of the professors and the great majority 
of the members of the junior staffs are Australian graduates. Many 
Australian graduates have afterwards obtained distinction at English, Ger- 
man, and American Universities as post-graduate students, lecturers, and 
professors. 

No Australian University provides an entirely free education. Total 
income fi-om fees in the three largest Universities (in 1911) : — Sydney, 
£20,206 ; Melbourne, £31,242 ; Adelaide, £9,381. The annual revenue from 
fees diminishes with increasing Uberahty in Grovernment gi-ants. The 
statutory endowment varies from £5,000 (Tasmania) to £22,000 (Melbourne), 
But the stj,tutory endowment is supplemented by large additional ajinual 



Educational Policy and Development. 541 

grants for special purposes. Last year (1912) the total amount of 
State aid received by Sydney University was £44,000, by Melbourne 
University nearly £47,000, or without special building grants, £.37,500. 
New South Wales is the only State which makes statutory provision for the 
future increase of State aid to the University. By the University [Amend- 
ment] Act 1912, the statutory endowment of the University was doubled, 
and it was further provided that when the population returns of the State 
involve an increase in the number of exhibitions granted for free University 
education (one exhibition for every 500 persons between the ages of seventeen 
and twenty) the endowment " shall be increased at the rate of £1 for every 
fifteen persons of such increase." When the new scheme of State University 
exhibitions is in operation, there may be 800 students in attendance at Sydney 
University who pay no fees. These State exhibitions are not like other 
University exhibitions, tenable only in the faculties of arts and pure science. 
They may be held in any professional school, in a proportion to be determined 
each year by the Senate of the University. The Government of New South 
Wales has thus given effect to what has for long been an educational ideal 
in Great Britain and Australia — the ideal of a system which shall form a pro- 
gressive and continuous whole, from the primary, through the secondary 
schools, to the technical colleges and the University. The Minister of Educa- 
tion, in introducing the Bill, said " We want to make the University the final 
stage in the educational scheme as laid down by the Government ; to exclude 
nobody, but to admit everybody who has brains and application. If there 
has been a ladder of education it has been a ladder beset with difficulties. 
We want to make a road. It cannot be a royal road, but we hope to make 
it easier to the aggregate child-intelligence of the State." In the other 
Australian States, there is likewise a rapidly growing acknowledgment of 
the claims of the Universities for greater public support, and, while a com- 
pletely free University is still indefinitely distant, considerable progress has 
been made towards the attainment of the ideal, without in any way lowering 
the standards of University admission or instruction. 

At Sydney and Melbourne, there are affiliated residential colleges within 
the University grounds (Sydney 4, Melbourne 3), but only a small proportion 
of the students reside in the colleges. These colleges are not under Univer- 
sity control, but they provide tutors, who supplement the instruction given 
at the University, mainly in the faculty of arts. In Melbourne, where 
attendance at lectures in arts and law is not compulsory, though non- 
attendance is exceptional, the colleges play a more important part 
than in Sydney, where attendance at University lectures is compulsory 
in all faculties. The colleges, while admitting students without respect 
to religious creed, are closely connected with religious denominations — • 
Church of England, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, and Methodist. The 
Women's College in Sydney is non-sectarian. In Brisbane three residential 
colleges (Church of England, Presbyterian, and ]\Iethodist) have been estab- 
lished in coimexion with the new University of that State. At the other 
Australian Universities there are at present }io residential colleges. 

The University of Queensland, although it maintains the priiiciplo of a 
teaching University, makes certain concessions to external students. Bris- 
bane does not occupy the same dominant position as the capitals of the 



542 Federal Handbook. 



other States, and there are a nuraber of excellent provincial institutions in 
Queensland capable of supplying instruction in the more general subjects. 
External students are aided by a well -organized correspondence study 
department. 

Courses of evening lectures are provided at some of the Universities for 
students who are unable to attend during the day, and the new Universities 
of Queensland and Western Australia propose to make special arrangements 
for such students. Melbourne University provides evening lectures in a 
selected number of first and second year arts subjects, also in agriculture, 
mining, and architectuxe. (Number of students in attendance in 1912, 81.) 
Sydney University provides almost a full arts course for evening students, 
and nearly all the courses in the school of economics are given in the evening. 
(Attendance in 1912, 286.) 

The University extension movement has not been a success in Australia, 
except to a limited extent in New South Wales. Very few University exten- 
sion courses have recently been given in Victoria or South AustraUa. The 
Sydney University Extension Board, during period 1908-12, provided 
courses of lectures at 56 coimtry centres. During 1912, 47 University exten- 
sion courses (3-6 lectures) were given in New South Wales (average atten- 
dance, 122). 

Since the oldest University in Australia has been in existence for little 
more than 60 years, and the latest is only a year old, the influence of Univer- 
sity education on the national life has been naturally a thing of slow growth. 
The first task, after providing for a broad liberal education, was to institute 
courses of professional education. Law and medicine were the first pro- 
fessional faculties established. The Australian Universities are now well repre- 
sented in all the higher Courts of Justice in the Commonwealth. The first 
three Judges of the High Court of the Commonwealth were all graduates of 
Sydney University. Melbourne had a medical school in active operation 
long before the Sydney Medical School was established in 1883. Sydney has 
now over 600 medical graduates ; Melbourne has over 1,000. Official statistics 
as to the proportion of Australian qualified, to foreign qualified, medical 
practitioners in the Commonwealth are not available. A private analysis of 
the medical registers in four States shows the following result. The figures 
are approximate, as some of the med'cal registers are very imperfect : — • 
New South Wales, foreign qualified practitioners, 654 ; AustraUan, 
569. Victoria, foreign, 541; Australian, 681. Queensland, foreign, 241; 
Australian, 150. South Australia, foreign, 146; Australian, 142. Western 
Australia, foreign, 182 ; Australian, 102. Medical schools exist only in 
Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide Universities. Australian graduates 
in science and engineering are now to be found in all the more important 
mining and industrial enterprises of Australia, and on the field in various parts 
of Asia, Africa, and America. The Australian Universities have also been 
represented in recent South Polar expeditions. Important original investi- 
gations in Australian geologv, biology, anthropology, etc., have been conducted 
by Australian University teachers and graduates, whose work has been recog- 
nised by foreign Universities and learned societies. The more recently estab- 
lished protessional schools are now making their influence felt in the gradual 
raising of the higher standards of technical education. 



Educational Policy and Development. 543 

Only within recent years have serious efforts been made to extend 
the facilities offered for post-graduate instruction and research. A small 
annual grant is made in some cases for providing Science Research 
Scholarsliips (1912— Melbourne, £2,000 ; Sydney, £1,000). In a new Uni- 
versity the teaching function dominates. The teachers, especially in the 
faculty of arts, are overbm'dened with formal lecturing and class work, and 
have too many subjects in charge to permit of the necessary specialization. 
Yet, in spite of these restrictions, the annual output of original work is highly 
creditable to the Australian Universities, especially in the scientific depart- 
ments, where the teachers are in less bondage to the formal lecturing 
system. 

Important changes have been made in the governments of the Univer- 
sities and their relation to the other parts of the national system of educa- 
tion. The representative character of the senate or supreme administrative 
body has been broadened, and now, in nearly every case, contains govern- 
ment or Parliamentary representatives. The Universities and the Educa- 
tion Departments have been brought into closer contact, to their reciprocal 
advantage, without loss of University independence or freedom of teaching. 
Extended public and Parliamentary interest has led to a wonderful increase 
in the number of the various professional and scientific departments, but 
sufficient thought has not been given to the greatly increased expenditure 
which will be necessary for the effective equipment and maintenance of the 
new schools. The faculties of arts have made, comparatively speaking, 
less progress, although chairs of education and economics have in some cases 
been added. There are still lacking chairs of ancient history, psychology, 
poUtical philosophy, and sociology. It is a matter for astonishment that no 
school of sociology has yet been established in any Australian University. 
A fairly complete department of economics exists at the University of Sydney, 
but no special instruction is provided in sociology. In all the Universities, the 
arts curriculum is now arranged so as to allow a fairly wide list of " options," 
the general aim being to avoid the two extremes of premature specialization 
and dissipation of energy over an excessive number of different subjects. 

Among the Universities, Melbourne was until lately, perhaps, the most 
conservative, and Sydney the most advanced in the arrangement of the arts 
curriculum, but Melbourne University has now (1913) considerably revised 
its regulations and curricula for degrees in both arts and science. Ade- 
laide provides, more than the others, for specialization during the arts course. 
It is probable that, with greater development, the traditional arts faculty will 
be replaced by a faculty of liberal studies, composed of a number of relatively 
independent departments. In that case, the entrance standard would require 
to be raised, and the present first year courses would be left to higher schools 
and colleges. 

The Australiaii Universities come into contact with the other departments 
of national education mainly on two sides, higher school education and tech- 
nical education. In the absence of any departmental organization of secon- 
dary education, the Universities of Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide insti- 
tuted junior and senior public examinations, on similar lines to those adopted 
by Oxford and Cambridge. These examinations have now fulfilled their 
function, and will gradually disappear, to be replaced by higher school 

C.l-2ir,4. 2 m 



544 Federal Handbook. 



examinations, controlled by a conjoint board, representing the Education 
Departments and the Universities. The matriculation examination will be 
retained only for the benefit of those who do not qualify for admission by 
means of the leaving certificate. 

The general unsatisfactory condition of technical education in Australia 
has been already described. It is not in the least probable that the Australian 
technical colleges will develop into technical Universities on the German 
model. Future development will be on British lines, a greater extension of 
the higher scientific-technical work at the University, which should be the 
highest centre of training, and at which all the great national interests should 
be represented. The technical colleges will be organized so as to free the 
Universities from great part of the necessary elementary scientific instruction, 
and to supplement the University by affording material facilities for specialized 
technical application and research. 

Complaints have been made that the Australian Universities stand outside 
the national life, in dignified but dangerous isolation. The charge is usually 
made in loose general terms, and with a childish ignorance of the evidence. 
Sometimes what is meant is that the University should open its doors to the 
incompetent. At other times, the reference is to the comparatively small 
number of graduates who adopt politics as a profession. The Universities 
conceived their first duty to be the provision of a liberal and professional 
education. For any extension of their work they had to depend on increased 
Government grants. It is not the Universities, but the State Governments, 
who have failed in the necessary task of providing systematic instruction at 
the Universities in economic, social, and poUtical science, as part of a training 
for public and political life. During the present year (1913) a Workers' 
Educational Association has been formed in several of the Austrahan States, 
a non-party and unsectaiian association, with aims similar to those of the 
present English association. The Australian Universities are entering into 
sympathetic relations with the new movement, and some of them have already 
taken steps to establish tutorial classes on the model of those which have 
been so successful in England. 

Students of education will have recognised in this condensed account 
many parallels to English and Scottish educational policy and development. 
According to the census of 1911, 96 99 per cent, of the total population had 
been' born either in Australasia or in the United Kingdom. The two largest 
foreign-born elements of the population were German (O* 75 per cent.) and 
Chinese (0- 47 per cent.). The Australian people is indeed more homogeneous 
than the parent stock, and its futui-e development may be more easily pre- 
dicted than that of the United Kingdom. Foreign institutions and modes of 
life rarely become acclimatized, which is a misfortune in some instances, 
e.g., art, cookery, architecture, and the more refined kinds of social recreation. 
The Austrahan national system of education is strongly akin in many features 
to the French national system, but there has been no direct borrowing. 
French influence has come by way of England, which was greatly affected 
during last century by the social and poUtical ideas and example of France. 

One grave defect of a highly centralized system has already been men- 
tioned, its failure to secure corresponding local interest and effort. The 
attempt to stimulate the sense of local responsibility, by means of single or 



Educatioxal PoLiCf AXD Developmext. 545 

district school committees, has, up to the present, been a wretched failure. 
Victoria is, perhaps, the only State where rural schools in general show any 
appreciable improvement due to local interest or expenditure. 

Another defect of a centralized system of national education is, according 
to some writers, that it means a machine-made teacher and a standardized 
■child. The criticism was directed against the English board school, and so 
far may have been warranted. But with the new system of training teachers, 
in close contact with the University, and with the consequent free play of 
ideas, the danger of the machine-made teacher is diminished. The danger 
l^ecomes serious only when the chiefs of the service are impervious to new 
ideas, and when the rank and file are excluded fi-om the broadening and 
inspiring influence of a University education. Such conditions no longer 
•exist in Australia, and there is little fear of their being restored. " Standardi- 
zation " is a term too vague in its reference to be anything more than a 
question-begging epithet, like " democratic." Standardization is not neces- 
sarily an evil. It is not an evil in good manners or in the essentials of a 
.sound liberal education. Changes in the methods of examination and inspec- 
tion, and greater freedom in the detailed carrying out of the new programmes 
of instruction, which are very broad and intelligent in conception, have already 
done much to counteract the tendency to mechanical uniformity in the 
routine of school work. 

A final danger of the centralized system of national education is said to 
b)e the opportunity which H puts at the disposal of a reactionary or tyrannical 
■Government. With an army of instructors, drilled into a common subser- 
vience to regulations fi-om head-quarters, a nation may in a generation or two 
be turned from free men into slaves or machines. This fearful prospect 
alarms the imagination of those who live constantly in dread of the " coming 
socialism." To one who has grown old in the service of the Australian 
people, the danger seems illusory. The leviathan of a self-organized democracy 
is not likely to be the fearful monster conjured up in such alarmist dreams. 
It is no doubt possible, even certain, that the future holds surprises for social 
optimists, as well as for social pessimists. But even supposing that the 
worst which is feared should become true, there are still grounds for the faith 
that the period of reaction or tyranny would be only a temporary lapse from 
the ideal of a free national self-development. The free spirit of a nation 
may be trusted to react, sooner or later, on its own institutions, which that 
same spirit has created. The chm-ches, whose main reason for existence is to 
bear witness to the reality of a moral order, may be trusted to keep alive the 
•conviction that nothing can permanently prevail against the spiritual forces 
which rule the world. And the national Universities may be trusted to do 
their part. Only when the Universities in older lands became class institu- 
tions did they fail to fulfil their high function, and become instruments of 
reaction and subservience. As the centres of free and enlightened thought 
on all the great human interests, the national Universities of Australia will 
not, it may be believed, fail to supply men of light and leading for the nation. 
The Universities of the past sent forth men who withstood Popes and Em- 
perors. The Universities of the future may be trusted to provide men who 
will not bend the knee before Kiufj Demos, or acknowledjie anv (jther master 
than the spirit of freedom and truth. 

2 M 2 



5i6 



Federal Handbook. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

POLITICAL SYSTEMS OF AUSTRALIA. 

W. Harrison Moore, B.A., LL.D., Professor oj Law at the University of 

Melbourne. 



SYNOPSIS. 



1. The Federal System of 

Government. 

2. Responsible Government. 

3. Parliaments and their Con- 

stitution. 

4. The Two Chambers of the 

Legislature. 

5. The Cabinet. 

6. Party Government. 

7. The Labour Party. 



8. Administrative Problems. 

9. The Courts and the Constitu- 

tion. 
10. Commonwealth and State 

Functions. 
IL The Development of the 

Federal Con.stitution. 

12. Constitution Amendment. 

13. Imperial Relations. 



1. The Federal System of Government. 

The Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900 recites the 
agreement of the people of New South Wales, Victoria, South Aus- 
tralia, Queensland, and Tasmania to unite in " one indissoluble 
Federal Commonwealth under the Crown " and under the Consti- 
tution thereby established, and provides that the Colonies (with Western 
Australia if she join in the agreement) shall accordingly be united by proclam- 
ation of the Crown upon a day appointed. The proclamation was made 
on 17th September, 1900, and on 1st January, 1901, the appointed day, 
the Federal Commonwealth came into being. Western Australia having by 
this time accepted the Constitution, the Commonwealth included the whole 
six colonies. 

The foundation of the Commonwealth and the Constitution upon an 
Act of the Imperial Parliament checks all argument as to the legal origin 
of either ; we are thus spared some of the speculations which political 
communities of this type appear to invite. It enables us also to recognise 
the agreement of the colonies as at any rate the causa sine qua non ; such 
recognition in no way impaii's the unity of the Act of Constitution or suggests 
dangerous rights of secession. In complete accordance with the doctrine of 
colonial self-government laid down for Australia in 1850, the union and its 
conditions (subject to some alteration of the provisions concerning appeals 
to the King in Council) were framed in Australia itself, and the Imperial 
Parliament in passing the Statute which gave them legal form acted as the 
supreme constituent authority in the Empire. 

An extensive literature exists on the subject of the several unions of States, 
and no definition of a federal union could be offered which would not challenge 
criticism. For pm'poses of description, however, it may be said that a 
federal government exists in any political community where the powers of 
government are divided between two authorities — a central authority ex- 
tending to the whole territory and population, and a number of particular 
authorities limited to particular areas and persons and things therein — 
each of which is equipped for its own purposes without recourse to the other, 
and which are so far independent of each other that neither can destroy the 
other or impair its powers or encroach upon its sphere. 



Political Systems of Australia. 547 

If it is asked why the Australian colonies preferred a federal to an incor- 
porate union, the division to the concentration of power, the most obvious 
answer lies in the fact that where several States, independent of each other, 
come together to form a new political community, there is, in the absence of 
any imperative force, a strong bias against complete self-surrender and 
absorption. The same cause influences the form which federalism is likely 
to assume — in its most natural shape, the constituent States will not only 
preserve their own identity, but will reserve the general powers of govern- 
ment and will commit to the new federal authority specific powers only. 

This tendency will be the greater if the union is formed under the auspices 
of the existing Governments and of State politicians. It may be overcome 
if the union is achieved either by or in the presence of force, as in Germany, 
where the Empire was founded on the military supremacy of Prussia, whose 
hegemony is stamped upon the Constitution. In South Africa, the deliberate 
preference for an incorporate union was due to a variety of conditions, chief 
amongst which were that the fundamental divisions of South African politics 
transcended colonial boundaries altogether, and (it may be surmised) that 
the pathway to union was beaten out by men whose position in the country 
enabled them to view the conditions with detachment from local preposses- 
sions and connexions. 

That the Canadian Constitution gives the residuary power to the 
Dominion Parliament and only specific powers to the Provinces is no excep- 
tion to the rule. In addition to the fact that in the years 1864-1867, when 
the " confederation " was forming, the United States was a neighbour flushed 
with the spirit of American unity, is the fact that the Dominion Constitution 
was not merely nor mainly a union of the British North American colonies ; 
it was, so far as concerned its principal members — Ontario and Quebec — 
a dissolution of the incorporate union of Upper and Lower Canada and the 
substitution of a federal bond. 

In Australia, all these exceptional conditions were absent. There was no 
imperative external pressure — ^the questions of the Pacific and of a White Aus- 
tralia had not then assumed the importance which later events and a wider 
outlook have given them. Union was a governmental convenience rather 
than a necessity, designed for the attainment of certain obvious and practical 
purposes, more apparent to men of political experience than to the multitude. 
In such circumstances, it was natural to build on existing foundations, to 
leave things unchanged except so far as change should be necessary to secure 
the practical ends in view. It is not necessary to lay stress upon mutual 
jealousies, and the impossibility of obtaining union upon other terms. To 
do 30 is to suggest that the Constitution was to its framers a pis-aller, an 
acceptance of the second best ; and there is no reason for doubting their 
belief that the great interests which they had in view would be served by a 
government with powers definitely limited and pointing towards those ends 
better than by one which was burdened with the miscellaneous functions of a 
Parliament with plenary powers. An ardent national spirit and widespread 
national consciousness have been the growth of the twelve years since federa- 
tion was accomplished : the product of a sense of common external interests 
and possible dangers on the one hand, and, on the other, of more clearly 
d^ned differences in political thought and aims. 



548 Federal Handbook. 



The position, as it presented itself to federalists, cannot be described 
better than in the resolutions of the National Australasian Convention of 
1891 :— 

" That, in order to establish and secure an enduring foundation for the- 
structure of a Federal Grovernment, the principles embodied in the reso- 
lutions following be agreed to : — 

" 1. That the powers and privileges and territorial rights of the several 
existing Colonies shall remain intact except as to such surrenders 
as may be agreed upon as necessary and incidental to the 
power and authority of the National Federal G-overnment. 
" 2. No new State shall be formed by separation from another State,. 
nor shall any State be formed by the junction of two or more 
States or parts of States, without the consent of the Legislatures 
of the States concerned, as well as of the Federal Parliament. 
" 3. That the trade and intercourse between the federated Colonies, 
whether by land carriage or by coastal navigation, shall b& 
absolutely free. 
" 4. That the power and authority to impose Customs duties and 
duties of Excise upon goods the subject of Customs duties, 
and to offer bounties, shall be exclusively lodged in the Federal 
Grovernment and Parliament, subject to such disposal of the 
revenues thence derived as shall be agreed upon. 
" 5. That the naval and military defence of Australia shall be en- 
trusted to federal forces, under one command. 
" 6. That provision shall be made in the Federal Constitution which 
will enable each State to make such amendments in its Con- 
stitution as may be necessary for the purposes of the 
federation." 
These principles were emphasized in the Federal Convention of 
1897-9. 

A clause in the draft of 1891, making the Governor-General of the Com- 
monwealth the channel of communication between the Imperial Government 
and the States, was omitted in the final scheme ; and the Canadian plan, 
which gives to the Dominion Government the appointment of the Lieutenant- 
Governors of the Provinces and a veto on provincial legislation was carefully 
avoided. The object of the Constitution was to mark out the sphere of 
the Federal Govermnent, to ensure the completeness of the power of that 
Government in its sphere, and to leave the rest — the States' Constitutions,, 
their frame of government, and their powers of government — unchanged. 

2. Responsible Government. 

In considering the structure of government, the States first demand 
attention, as being the earlier in time, and the schools of experience in 
which the framers of the Commonwealth Goverimient learnt their work. In 
all other aspects than the federal, the experiences of the Colonies under 
responsible government so obviously govern the Constitution, whether for 
warning or for example, that it will be convenient to let one account 
serve for both Federal and State Governments, merely calling attention to 
significant points of difference. 



Political Systems of Australia. 549 

Five of the federating Colonies acquired " responsible government " 
between 1855 and 1859 ; Western Australia did not reach her political 
majority imtil 1889. The mode in which the several Constitutions were 
established was not uniform, and in some cases presented singular com- 
plications, and obscurities. 

But ultimately, all may be founded on some Act of the Imperial Par- 
liament conferring upon a Colonial legislature the amplest power. Wliile 
the Imperial Parliament has thus been the origin, it has also been the model 
of the Colonial Constitutions. 

The government of the Colonies is essentially self-government ; the Colonial 
legislatures are not limited by any doctrine which would treat them as the 
mere instruments of the Imperial Parliament. And just as the British 
Constitution rests on a legal basis of Parliamentary sovereignty as dis- 
tinguished from people's sovereignty, the self-government of Australia has 
meant Parliamentary government, unhampered by limitations which an 
authority merely delegated by the people would suggest. The most im- 
portant manifestation of this is that self-government in a Colony has included 
the power of amending its Constitution, and that the constituent power 
has been lodged in the Colonial legislature without further reservation than 
is involved by the observance of forms which the legislature itself may 
abolish, and, in some cases, has abolished. 

The assumption of " responsible government " involved several things, 
of which the full significance and appreciation were only disclosed by time. 
It meant that, in relation to the internal government of the Colony, the 
Imperial Piirliament and Government abstained from interference in matters 
of policy and administration. This consideration governed the exercise 
of the reserved power of disallowing Colonial legislation, as well as of the 
ordinary powers committed to the Governor by the Crown. 

It meant also the transfer of power from a Governor, with a staff of 
subordinate of&cers, answerable like himself to the British Government, 
to an executive which was responsible within the Colony itself. It has 
meant, in practice, that this responsibility has assumed a form similar to 
that which has grown up in the United Kingdom since the beginning of the 
eighteenth century. In short, " responsible government " has acquired a 
secondary meaning connoting "cabinet government" or "party government," 
so that in the Colonial legislature we find not merely the legislative authority 
but the power which makes and unmakes Ministries. 

This is foreshadowed rather than established in the Constitution. In 
spite of expressions in the Constitution, which assume the existence in fact 
of the system, the Cabinet system rests to this day in Australia mainly, 
as it does in England wholly, upon conventional understanding and practices 
rather than upon positive law. Thus, in addition to the flexibility which 
belongs to a legal framework alterable by the ordinary legislature, there it. 
the further flexibility arising from the free play of usage and convention. 
The once famous theory of iliginbotham (Chief Justice of Victoria), which 
attributed to the Constitution Acts the whole system of responsible goverimient , 
now finds few supporters. The legal part of the Australian Constitution 
until the establishment of the Conmionwcalth was mainly concerned with 
the Legislatures, their organization and arrangemente. 



550 Federal Handbook. 



3. Parliaments and their Constitution. 

All tlie States' Constitutions provide for two Chambers. The Assembly, 
or Lower House, is democratic in basis; and in its control of IVIinisters, 
its financial preponderance, its limited term, and its liability to dissolution, 
recalls the House of Commons. 

In all the " Lower Houses " members have long received an " allowance " 
or " reimbursement of expenses," which is in substance a salary. The 
Senate of the Commonwealth, and the Legislative Councils of South Australia, 
Western Australia, and Tasmania are also paid. In addition, members 
receive a pass over the Government railways, and, in some cases, allowance 
for travelling expenses, wliile there may be further allowances for special 
service, as on the Standing Committee on Railways in New South Wales 
and Victoria, or on Royal Commissions of Inquiry. It may be mentioned 
that a procedure similar to that by which payment of members of the House 
of Commons was introduced in 1911 — the inclusion of the necessary amount 
in the Appropriation Bill — brought about a Constitutional crisis and " dead- 
lock " in Victoria in 1877, though payment of members had been provided 
for by temporary Acts since 1871. 

Manhood suffrage for the Lower House has been universal for many 
years ; women's suffrage upon an equal qualification was introduced into 
South Australia in 1894:, and was adopted by Western Australia (1899), 
New South Wales (1903), Tasmania (1903), Queensland (1905), and Victoria 
(1909), and by the Commonwealth in 1902. Every adult is entitled to vote 
in the district in which he resides. Plural voting is permitted in no State 
and is forbidden for the Commonwealth Parliament, but in Victoria and 
Queensland property-holders have an option of exercising their vote where 
the property is situated, or where they reside. The result in Victoria is 
that while Melbourne is at a general election a safe Labour seat, at a by- 
election it is pretty certain to be won by an anti-Labour candidate. 

A new country presents few of those features which in older governments 
suggest competing methods of distributing representation amongst the 
constituencies ; and thus the electoral units are found by dividing the electorate 
into districts, with an approximately equal number of electors. One im- 
portant modification of this plan is adopted : some advantage is given in 
the distribution to rural over metropolitan electors. This is founded on 
various grounds, but exists mainly to establish a balance of interests, and 
especially to reduce the disproportionate weight of an urban vote con- 
centrated in the capitals. It is recognised in the Commonwealth as well 
as in the States. 

In the States of Queensland and New South Wales provision has been 
made for the redistribution of seats, due to changes in population, without 
need for recourse to special legislation. In the other States there is no 
such provision, and time produces similar anomalies to those found in the 
United Kingdom. In the Commonwealth Parliament the matter, of course, 
touches the relative weight of the States in the Parliament, and i i, therefore, 
provided for by the Constitution, supplemented by legislation. It is the 
business of the Chief Electoral Officer every fifth year to take into consideration 
the representation of the several States in relation to the statistics of popu- 
lation, and to determine whether any State has lost, and any other State 



Political Systems of Australia. 551 

gained, a member, for the system contemplates adjustment by transfer and 
not by an increase of the total number of members. This determination 
is operative per se ; and it then becomes the duty of the Government to 
order commissioners to redistribute the seats in the States concerned, in 
order to give effect to it. The commissioners' reports are laid before both 
Houses of Parliament, and, if approved — they cannot be amended — pass 
into operation. The question suggests itself — what would be the position, 
if, after the Electoral Officer had made his determination, either House of 
Parliament should refuse its assent to any consequential adjustment ? The 
reports of commissioners are by no means accepted as of course, and are 
the occasion of fierce party battles in the Hoiise. The machinery of the 
law may also be called into operation by the shifting of population within 
a State. 

The single-member constituency is the rule in Australia for the Lower 
House ; but Tasmania has for years used an adaptation of Hare's system 
of proportional representation, involving the multi-member electoral division. 
The States have made various experiments in schemes for determining the 
majority of votes where there are several candidates. Xew South "Wales 
adopted the second ballot in 1910 as a means of coping with the " split 
vote " where party discipline was not sufficiently strong to deal with the 
matter ; the scheme was naturally opposed by the party which could rely 
on its own organization to prevent rivalry from its own ranks. Queensland, 
in 1892, Western Australia, in 1907, and Victoria, in 1911, have adopted 
various forms of " contingent " or " preferential " voting. Of the general 
effect of the schemes, it cannot be said that they have failed in their aim, 
though, with the increased sharpness of party conflict and the growing 
strength of party discipline, they appear to have come on the stage just as 
the conditions which demanded them were passing away. On the other 
hand, the party system itself peculiarly demands provision for the repre- 
sentation of minorities. Possibly, the single -member constituency may, in 
general, secure this in a haphazard way, though the expectations on which 
the English system of 1885 was based have been singularly falsified in practice. 
The Commonwealth Senate, with its multi-member constituency, shows 
what is possible with a block vote as directed by a powerful organization. 
No pro\'ision, however, has been made, except by Tasmania, for the 
representation of minorities. The disadvantage of all such schemes is that 
among a people fairly evenly divided in their politics, nice and accurate 
adjustment of their representation makes Parliamentary government difficult 
and may involve the whole institution in discredit. This consideration, of 
course, does not apply with equal force to Second Chambers, and it is 
possibly in connexion with an elective Upper House that proportional 
representation promises the best results. 

The ballot has been so long in use in the United Kingdom (though its 
experimental character is recalled by the fact that it still depends on an 
annual Act) that people forget that it used to be described as the " Australian 
ballot " ; Australian experience was an important factor in encouraging its 
adoption in England. In recent years, Australia has been making some 
further experiments in the mode of recording votes. Partly, though not 
solely, out of consideration for women electors, various provisions have been 



552 Federal Handbook. 



made for recording votes otherwise than by attendance at the polling booth 
in the elector's division. The most important of these has been " voting 
by post," introduced in Victoria in 1900, and adopted by Queensland, Western 
Australia, and the Commonwealth. It has been fiercely assailed by the 
Labour Party as permitting violations of the secrecy of the ballot, and 
obviously, if admitted as a general alternative, it would afford a means whereby 
any person or political party able to bring pressure upon the elector could 
readily make that pressure effective. Actually, voting by post is limited 
to cases of illness, distance from polling booth, and absence. But in Queens- 
land it was asserted that the system was abused, and after a constitutional 
crisis in 1907, the law was 'imended in 1908 so as to permit electors to record 
an " absent vote " at any booth. The same course was followed in the 
Commonwealth, where the Labour Party abolished the postal vote in 1911, 
and substituted " absent voting " at any polling booth in Australia. The 
objection to this system is that it facilitates impersonation by diminishing 
the risks of detection. Needless to say, the views held on the subject are 
affected by the interests deemed to be involved. The postal vote facilitates 
the recording of women's and farmers' votes, which are thought to favour 
the Liberals. The absent vote provides for the shearers, seamen, and other 
shifting classes who vote " Labour," while it does nothing for the farmer 
who is distant from a polling booth, or the woman who is suffering the 
infirmities of sex. It is by no means certain that the calculations of interest 
on the subject by either party are sound. 

In the organization and procedure of the Chambers the English model 
is closely followed, and May^s Parliamentary Practice is as familiar as in the 
House of Commons. The closure in various forms is now acclimatised in 
Australia. There is usually a time limit for speeches on motions for ad- 
journment, and in the Commonwealth Parliament a rule was made in 1912 
limiting speeches in the House of Representatives to 65, or in certain 
cases 95 minutes. In the Commonwealth Parliament and in some of the 
States Parliaments, the consideration of Bills introduced in one session may, 
imder certain restrictions, be resumed in the next session of the same 
Parliament at the stage they had reached at the prorogation. 

In the Commonwealth Parliament the Speaker's robes and the mace 
were discarded during the last Labour regime, but were restored in the Par- 
liament of 1913. A more serious breach with English traditions has recently 
been made in the practice which frankly treats the Presidency, the Speaker- 
ship, and the Chairmanship of Conmiittees as party appointments to be 
determined anew in each Parliament. 

4. The Two Chambers of the Legislature. 

The second Chamber in Australia is foreshadowed in the composition 
of the Legislative Coimcil established in New South Wales in 1842, 
which consisted as to one -third of nominated and as to two -thirds of 
elected members. Much discussion on the subject took place in the follo\\-ing 
years, when Australian constitutions were in the making. Succeeding 
Secretaries of State, the Board of Trade, and members of the House of Com- 
mons in England ; the Governors, Legislatiires, press, and public meetings 
in the Colonies took an active part. To one, the tradition — English and 



Political Systems op Australia. 553 

Colonial — seemed a sufficient reason in favour of the two Chambers ; to 
another, the adoption of the English model appeared to invite a comparison 
which will lead to embarrassing claims by the Colonial Assembly. Others 
again desired a Second Chamber as a guarantee for the presence in political 
life of persons of independence and character, a Chamber which should at 
once be a brake upon " naked democracy " and a model of tone and dis- 
interestedness in public life. "While such a Chamber might be relied on to 
stand between the Government and the onslaughts of a democratic Chamber, 
it must not be merely the creature of Government, or it would lack respect 
and influence. Therefore a life tenure for nominees was to be preferred to 
a limited term. 

It is curious to note that in the discussions preceding responsible 
government, the common assumption on all sides is that a Council will be a 
supporter of Government; and the critics of Government address them- 
selves to considering whether it is better to have the Government phalanx 
in the Assembly or in a separate Cha.mber. The Constitution contained in 
the Imperial Act of 1850 left the settlement of the question to the 
Colonies themselves, provisionally continuing the form of Legislature set 
up in 1842. 

In the result, New South Wales and Queensland adopted nominee Councils, 
South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, and (when her time came) Western 
Australia, elective Councils. In the elective Comicils, the franchise varies 
in details, but its character may be judged by the fact that the proportion of 
Comicil to Assembly electors is from 30 to 40 per cent. 

In contrast with the Assemblies, which are dissolved by lapse of time or 
prerogative act, the Comicils have a continuous existence. Moreover, 
whether the Council be a nominee body, whose members have a life 
tenure, or an elective body, its personnel changes very slowly. Successive 
reductions in some of the States of the term for which a Councillor 
is elected give an imiform tenure for six years, one third or one half of 
the members retiring by rotation every second or third year. But save in 
rare instances a member once elected retains his seat for life or imtil resigna- 
tion. Constituencies are large ; contests are expensive ; public interest 
centres in the Assembly ; the Council offers no temptation to ambibion. 
Members of Coimcil are generally older than Members of the Assembly, who 
are themselves middle aged ; well-to-do, sometimes wealthy, men, whose 
property, business, or profession, and not politics, has the first claim on their 
time and attention. They have claimed to stand outside the party system ; 
there has not been the same sharp division of their ranks as in the Assembly 
into Ministerial and Opposition, The party division has probably been more 
marked in the nominee Councils than in the elective, and it becomes more 
pronounced with the infusion of Labour members which the nominee system 
permits. But any Government may meet a check at the hands of a Legis- 
lative Council, however constituted. Not claiming to make and mimake 
Ministries, it does not recognise the obligation or the discipline of a party. 
When a Ministry is being formed, the Premier will include one or two members 
of the Comicil chosen less for their political views than for their persuasive 
influence in a small body which has learaed to tnist itself to the guidance of 
a few of its members. If these members have the necessary capacity and 



551 Federal Handbook. 



time available, they may be the means whereby the Council fulfils its revisory 
function with much public benefit. 

Designed as conservative bodies, the Councils have certainly fulfilled the 
retarding function of a Second Chamber. Nearly every measure which is 
claimed as democratic and progressive has had to pass the ordeal of several 
rejections. The several extensions of the franchise, including women's 
sufirage ; payment of members ; land taxation ; the whole range of " ex- 
perimental legislation " from schemes for land settlement and compulsory 
purchase to wages boards and arbitration courts ; the extension of govern- 
ment enterprise into the sphere of trading, have cheir long account of Bills 
rejected by the Councils. Even so well-tried a measure as Workmen's 
Compensation is in some cases still held back. The resistance of the Coimcils 
to drastic schemes for breaking up the large pastoral holdings and to land 
taxation, and the brake they apply to " socialistic legislation," have driven 
many, if not into the ranks, at any rate to the support of the Labour Party, 
and have been the main cause of the zeal of that Party for enlarging the 
powers of the Commonwealth Government, in whose constitution a forward 
policy has to encounter no such obstacle. 

Yet when all is said, Australia is able to pride herself on the multitude 
and variety of her legislative experiments, and with some justice she has 
been regarded as the world's political laboratory. When the Government 
and the Assembly have been very much in earnest — which is not always 
the case — ^and have been supported by a strong public opinion, the Coimcils 
have usually given way.* 

The nominee and elective Councils have of course presented distinctive 
problems in the long course of struggle between them and the Ministries. 
In the case of the nominee Councils the first question was the respective 
fmictions of Governor and Ministry in respect to nominations. In the view 
of the Go vendor (supported at first by the Colonial Office), it was essential to 
the usefulness and independence of the Council that its personnel should not 
be altered so as merely to reflect the shifting conditions of parties in the 
Assembly ; that though there was no legal limitation to the number of 
members of the Council, a conventional limitation should be accepted, and 
that appointments should in general be made only as vacancies arose by 
death or resignation. Ministers, on the other hand, contended that in this 
matter, as in others, self-government required that the Governor should 
accept the advice of IMinisters or find successors. On this subject, the earlier 
plan has been modified to the extent at any rate of abandoning the notion 
of a conventional limitation of numbers ; and in 1892 Lord Eipon accepted 
the principle of Ministerial responsibility, subject to the qualification that the 
Governor should act upon his own opinion if he had ground for believing 
that the Ministry was not supported in its action by the Assembly and the 
coimtry. This appears to have been the principle acted on by the Governor 

* A critic, however, might often have applied to the situation created the comment of a shrewd 
parliamentarian on the relations of the Cabinet and the Lords in England : " An Upper Chamber 
which will accept from a Ministry that it detests no measure that has not behind it an irresistible mass 
of excited p'ablic opinion, lias sooner or later the fate of those Ministers in its hands. For on the one 
band the friction generated by the process of forcing a Bill through a reluctant House of Lords annoys 
and scandalizes a nation, which soon grows tired of having a revolution once a twelve month ; and, on 
the other hand, the inability of a Cabinet to conduct through both Houses that continuous flow of 
legislation which tlie changing necessities of a country like ours demand, alienates those amongst its 
most ardent supporters who take little account of its difficulties and see only that it is unable to turn its 
Bills into Acts." (Trevelyan, lAfs and Letters of Macaiday, 2, 56.) 



Political Systems of Australia. 555 

of Queensland in 1907 when, on the rejection of certain Grovemment measures 
by the Council, the Premier asked for assurances, to be publicly notified, 
that persistence in the opposition would be followed by the appointment of 
a sufficient number of Coimcillors to enable the Government to carry out 
its policy. The Governor refused, the Ministry resigned, and a new Ministry 
accepted office on the imderstanding that an immediate appeal would be made 
to the comitry. A general election returned the old Ministry to office, and 
the Comicil accepted the Bills. The consciousness that the remedy of further 
appointments was available has been in all recent times a factor in inducing 
the Councils to accept legislation, as for instance the Land Tax in New South 
Wales in 1894 ; and in 1899 additional members were, in fact, appointed to 
carry the Federation Bill. 

In Queensland, the crisis of 1907 resulted in the legislative adoption of 
the referendum as an alternative method for settling disputes between the 
Chambers. In New South Wales, the anti-Labour Government in power in 
1910 — which had had its own difficulties with the Council — introduced a 
scheme for the prevention of deadlocks, at the same time providing for 
a legal limitation of the number of members of the Council. Some 
definite determination of the numerical relations of Coimcil and Assembly 
is, of course, essential to all schemes which look to an ultimate adjustment 
of the differences of the Chambers by a joint sitting. 

In the colonies which adopted elective Councils, the differences between 
the Chambers have been more frequent and acute. From the first, the 
Councils, as being elected, have been able to claim that they are responsible 
to their constituents, and particularly to urge with some force claims to a 
participation in financial policy greater than that of the House of Lords or 
of a nominee Chamber. In South Australia and in Victoria the differences 
between the Houses in these matters have been sharp ; and in Victoria, 
on three occasions — in 1865, 1867, and 1878 — the rejection of the Appropria- 
tion Bill has brought the Govermnent to a standstill. 

The memory of these conflicts remains, and was very apparent during the 
debates on the Federal Constitution in 1897-1899. Two remedies have 
suggested themselves. As early as 1874, the Government of Victoria appears 
to have intended to propose the substitution of a nominee for the elected 
Council ; and a Bill for the purpose was actually introduced in 1880, but did 
not obtain the absolute majority required. The remedy generally favoured 
and ultimately (1903) adopted leaves the principle of election unaffected, but 
makes provision for "deadlock." The joint sitting, the substitution of a sus- 
pensory for an absolute veto with or without a referendum, the dissolution of 
one or both the Houses — these schemes in various combinations have been 
discussed at various times. South Australia led the way with a provision 
whereby if the Assembly twice passed a Bill, with an intervening general 
ele' tion, the Governor might on the second rejection by the Council dissolve 
both Houses. This provision is in force to-day, with an alternative whereby 
the Governor may afforce the Council by issuing writs for the election of 
additional members. In 1901 and 1908 attempts were made by the Govern- 
ment to substitute a joint sitting after a measure had been twice rejected 
by the Council ; and in 1910 and 1911 the Labour Government introduced 
and passed througn the Assembly Bills whereby any scheme twice passed 



556 Federal Handbook. 



by the Assembly and rejected by the Council might, if again passed by the 
Assembly after a general election, be passed over the head of the Council. 

In 1911 the Council rejected the Appropriation Bill. The Government, fol- 
lomng the course taken by the Victorian Government in 1878, appealed to the 
Imperial Government to give effect to the proposals of the Bill of 1911, 
but was met with a refusal. It then dissolved the Assembly with a view to 
a later double dissolution, but the country was against it. The political 
history of South Australia during the last twenty years is one of constant 
conflict between the Houses — of unsuccessful attempts to reduce the franchise 
for the Coimcil and to establish more practicable means for making the will 
of the Assembly and its electors prevail. Women's suffrage, though applicable 
to both Houses, has widened the distance between Council and Assembly 
by lowering the proportion of Council electors to electors for the Assembly, 
and this fact is an important element in the situation. 

In Victoria, disputes between the Council and the Assembly were at last 
dealt with by the Constitution of 1903 under a plan suggested by the Com- 
monwealth Constitution. On the rejection of a Bill by the Council, the 
Governor may by proclamation dissolve the Assembly declaring th? cause 
of disagreement between the Houses. If the new Assembly again passes 
the Bill and the Council rejects it, both Coimcil and Assembly may be dis- 
solved. The scheme proposed that the new Council and Assembly should 
then hold a joint sitting ; but this had to be abandoned owing to the Council's 
opposition. The result therefore is that if each House is supported by its 
electors, there is no machinery for ending the dispute. It should be noticed 
that even the plan established is qualified and surrounded by precautions 
and safeguards. A dissolution of the Assembly within six months of its 
expiry by effluxion of time does not count, and no part of the scheme applies 
to provisions altering the Constitution of Council or Assembly. On no 
occasion has the machinery of the Act of 1903 been put in operation, though 
the Council has been active in criticism and in rejection of Government 
measures. 

When we pass from the Legislative Councils of the States to the Senate in 
the Parliament of the Commonwealth we are in a wholly different atmosphere. 
The framers of the Constitution were spared the fundamental problem of 
determining the basis of a Second Chamber, for they had a principle ready 
to hand — the representation of the States as such demanded at once by 
federation and by the practical exigencies of the situation. Equal repre- 
sentation in a Senate was after a struggle conceded to the six States. Each 
State is a single constituency, and the term of service for a Senator is six 
years, so arranged that half the Senators from each State retire every three 
years. The large constituency and the continuity of the Senate stand for 
the attempt to reproduce in the Senate something of the character of the ideal 
Second Chamber. But if violence was done to the democratic principle of 
equal citzenship by giving the same number of senators to all States regard- 
less of population, an attempt was made to atone for it, as well as to avoid 
the repetition in Commonwealth Govermnent of the experiences of the 
colonies, by making the qualification for Senators and electors the same as 
for members and electors of the House of Representatives, and by providing 
for payment of Senators on the same scale as members of the House. 



Political Systems of Australia. 557 

The Senate has equal powers with the House in ordinary legislation. 
But as to finance, a detailed and complicated scheme aimed at securing first 
the preponderance of the House of Representatives in relation to the" ordinary 
annual service of government " and, as a consequence, the primary responsi- 
bility of the Government to that House ; and, secondly, the protection of 
the Senate against every form of tacking, whether by lumping various pro- 
jects of taxation in the same measure, or by including schemes of expenditure 
outside the " ordinary annual ser\dce of government " in the Appropriation 
Bill, or by joining Bills of legislative policy with finance measures. (See 
the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900, sections 53-56.) For 
the Senate was, like existing Upper Houses, not to have power to amend 
finance measures, though it was compensated by a power to make 
requests. 

The possibility of conflict was foreseen, and section 57 provides for a 
double dissolution followed by a joint sitting in case the Senate twice rejects 
or fail 3 to pass a Bill sent to it by the House of Representatives. 

The experience of twelve years shows the Senate in constitution, in action, 
and in reputation very different from the design. The Constitution aimed 
at a combination of cabinet government with federal government, and there 
were prophets who foretold that the alliance was unnatural, and that one 
of the two must destroy the other. In the Commonwealth, cabinet govern- 
ment with its tradition of the supremacy of the Lower House, appears to 
have prevailed. To the Senate have been assigned two* members of the 
Cabinet, of whom only one would be a Minister with a portfolio, and the 
protests of the Senate against such scurvy treatment have been wilfully 
ignored. The absence of Ministers handicaps the Senate both in its legis- 
lative and in its critical capacity, for INIiinsters can only take part in the 
proceedings of their own Chamber. Very little legislation is iiiitiated in the 
Senate, which during the earlier months of a session has little to do, 
while towards the close of a session it is rushed wdth work, and before appeals 
to facilitate public business even the revisory function of a Second Chamber 
has to give way. It has little of the corporate feeling of the Legislative 
Councils ; it is more definitely organized as " Ministerial " and " Opposi- 
tion " ; and it would be idle to look to the Government supporters to champion 
Senate claims against the House. 

As a federal House of States, the Senate has long ceased to raise any 
expectation of activity as a guardian of State powers and functions ; and 
the conference of State Premiers has developed in part at leyst as the result 
of its failure in this respect. As a Second Chamber, it has been docile beyond 
expectation. In place of the cautious attitude of the Councils towards the 
legislation of a " progressive " Ministry, the Senate has shown a fiery zeal 
for experiment, and the leisure which it enjoys as an Upper House has been 
employed in the debating of motions for the nationalization of " monopolies," 
the further regulation of trusts and combines, and the enlargement generally 
of Commonwealth powers. These debates would have had more value if 
the Senate could have been taken seriously as an effective part of the con- 
stitutional machinery. But so long as it deferred to tradition by leaving 
to the House the active work of government while, unlike the Councils, it 

* In the Liberal Ministry of 1913 there were tliree Senators. 



558 Federal Handbook. 



accepted readily the legislation sent to it, it was esteemed in the community 
as little more than a debating society. 

This quiescence, however, depends on a political situation which is liable 
to change, and which in fact was changed by the general election of 1913. 
The elections of 1910 and 1913 returned Parliaments sharply divided into 
two parties. In the Parliament of 1910, the Labour Party had a large 
majority in both Houses ; in the Parliament of 1913 there were in the Senate 
29 Labour members and 7 Liberals, while in the House of Representatives 
the Liberals had a majority of one. The Labour Ministry retired on the 
declaration of the polls, and the Liberal Ministry, having to part with one 
of its supporters as Speaker, faced the equal ranks of its opponents in the 
House. This is the situation at the time of writing (August, 1913). As the 
Ministerial proposals include the repeal of several measures of their pre- 
decessors, it is evident that the Senate is likely to play an active part in the 
present Parliament. The result will probably be to make reform of the 
Senate an important plank in the Liberal programme. 

The Senate, indeed, is vulnerable from a democratic point of view in the 
unequal value assigned to individual citizenship by the equal representation 
of States. It has become vulnerable also by the mode of election for Senators. 
The three Senators returned for each State are elected upon a block vote 
which requires the elector to vote for three candidates and prohibits him from 
giving more than one vote to any candidate. The enormous constituency, 
which prevents a candidate from becoming personally known to the electors, 
makes the party and its organization predominant in elections. As parties 
obtain more control over the candidature and as electors vote more strictly 
on party lines, a small majority in any State is likely to secure the whole 
number of seats for that State. With a certain amomit of luck, the same 
Party may in the same way secure the three seats in each of the States. This 
is what happened at the election of 1910, when eighteen Labour Senators 
were returned. In 1913, three States returned three Labour Senators, two 
returned three Liberals, and one returned two Labour Senators and one 
Liberal. At each election, the difierence between the votes cast for the two 
parties was trifling. Some of the strongest objections to proportional repre- 
sentation — that it is apt to leave parties too nicely balanced or to favour 
the formation of small groups, and that it deprives elections of the driving 
power which comes from a large turnover of seats — ^have little or no appli- 
cation to a Second Chamber, which is, indeed, usually designed with the 
object of preventing the body from being too radically changed at any one 
time. The alteration of the electoral system of the Senate by some pro- 
vision for the representation of minorities is a reform in which all parties 
should be able to agree. 

5. The Cabinet. 

So far as concerns the Cabinet in the Australian States, there is 
little that needs description. In general, the substance, and perhaps even 
more the forms of British practice are observed. The Ministry may not 
dominate the Assembly as much as the English Cabinet to-day dominates 
the House of Commons ; it has been said to be less sensitive to defeats which 
are not a direct challenge to its authority. Collective responsibility is often 



Political Systems op Australia. 559 

a strain where party lines ire not clear and Ministerial supporters are drawn 
from various groups, or where the regular Opposition is not suflB.cientIy 
strong to threaten the Ministry. Reconstructions are called for by dis- 
satisfied supporters, and sometimes take place. They would be more 
frequent if it were possible to break the fall of an unpopular Minister in an 
agreeable way. The secrecy of Cabinet proceedings is guarded well enough 
in matters of the first importance. But in Australia, the number of depirt- 
mental matters dealt with in Cabinet is very large, and this has probably 
been responsible for a recent practice whereby frequently a comtnuniqiie is 
made to the press, summarizing the results of the Cabinet council. The 
number of Ministers is small, and while in England the more important 
Departments of State have at least two Ministers in Parliament, the Australian 
practice frequently assigns two and even three Departments to one Minister. 
As it is impossible for a Department to be represented directly in both Houses, 
the Cabinet includes two or toree "honorary Ministers," "Ministers without 
a portfolio " who may share the conduct of Government business in tho 
Legislative Council, and sometimes assist the Ministers in their Departments ; 
and Victoria has adopted a feature of parliamentary govermnent in Europe 
which permits Ministers in charge of a Bill to take part in the proceedings 
of the other House. As all Ministers are in the Cabinet, there is no training 
for Ministerial responsibility such as is afiorded by the Under-Secretaryship^ 
in England. Often a preliminary term is served as an " honorary Minister," 
and on a casual vacancy in a Department, the succession is commonly looked 
for by an honorarj'' Minister. On the other hand, as there are no sinecure 
offices like the Privy Ssal or the Chancellorship of the Duchy of Lancaster, 
honorary ofiice is sometimes accepted by men who are unable or unwilling 
to undertake heavy departmental work. The same reasons that in England 
warn the Prime Mini; ter not to accept an onerous Department exist in 
Australia. In the Commonwealth Government, Mr. Deakin became Prime 
Minister " without a portfolio," and during the succeeding Ministry the office 
of Prime Minister yms definitely constituted as a distinct " Department of 
State."* Another result of the system by which there are no Ministers out- 
side the Cabinet, is that the Attorney-General has always been in the Cabinet, 
a fact which gives the office a political rather than a professional character. 
It has in fact been held by gentlemen who were not members of the legal 
profession at all. 

" His Majesty's Opposition " has more formal recognition than in England, 
for the leader of the Opposition usually has an official secretary at the public 
expense, and in Queensland he receives a salary. 

6. Party Government. 

The Australian colonies in adopting the British system of cabinet 
government as their mode of self-government, took a course which 
provided for their immediate need of submitting the executive to colonial 
control. The system was one which in outline they understood, though 
even in England, outside official and ])arlian\ontary circles, there were 
probxbly few people in 1855 who could chim to know it intimately. The 

* In thj Cook Ministry thT Prime Miiiwter becimeMinbtcr for Home Affairs, but arranged that 
one of the honorary ininisters should practically administer tho Dji)artm'"nt. 

C. 12154. 2n 



560 Federal Handbook. 



conventions of the system were accepted so far as they were understood. 
A Government held office by the support of the Assembly ; that support 
might be withdrawn without any breach of propriety by the House and without 
injustice or hardship to Ministers. Opposition was a constitutional function 
and not unpatriotic or factious condact, if accompanied by an acceptance 
of the responsibility to assume office in certain well-defined contin- 
gencies. 

But such a system presents obvious temptations and dangers. In the 
absence of real differences of policy, it is apt to become a game in which men 
exercise their natural combrtiveness and rivalry, and in which Ministerial 
ojB&ce is the trophy awarded to the victors, a trophy which they hold on 
condition of defending it against all challengers. A lower level is reached if 
the contest is dominated by material rewards, when government is perverted 
by self-interest, loses all moral influence, and ceases to be representative 
in anything but name. If changes of Ministry are based on real 
differences of policy, still over frequent change destroys continuity and 
makes government ineffective. In England, these e%als have been 
encountered by the existence of parties, and the reduction of the 
contest in the main to a struggle between two parties. The small 
number of persons in Parliament who can look for any personal 
advantage from a change of Ministry ; the fact that those who may aspire 
to office have commonly an assured social position and some fortune so that 
the emoluments of office though pleasant are not of vital concern, tend to 
check the influence of personal interests, and to force political contests along 
lines of real difference in matters of public policy. Moreover, in England, 
party government grew out of parties, called into existence in the first 
instance by great public issues, but ultimately having an independent exist- 
ence, so that they lived not merely in the concert of their members for certain 
definite political ends, but in the memory of past conflicts, and of great 
leaders, in the possession of a name and of traditional principles and maxims 
of political conduct. These formed a continuous bond of association and 
gave the party a moral personality which could command attachment and 
loyalty. The leaders of the party, guiding its counsels and directing its 
policy, have been the most prominent men in Parliament, so that party 
allegiance has generally been identified with loyalty to an individual parlia- 
mentary leader or group of leading men. 

Not all these conditions were reproduced in the colonies which entered on 
the English system in the " fifties." Australia indeed shared in the remark- 
able change of tone which during the preceding seventy years had gradually 
banished the grosser forms of corruption from public life. The legitimate 
pecuniary rewards of Australian politics have always been inconsiderable 
and a public opinion not usually very observant or interested in political 
affairs, has always been very sensitive at the suggestion of illegitimate gains. 
Even the ordinary emoluments of office probably played a smaller part in 
the struggle thin might be supposed : office was at least as much the token 
of victory in the game as the material reward strivsn for. Certainly in the 
hurly-burly of the early years of responsible goverimient, the number of men 
who might naturally be affected by the lure of an official salary was smaller 
than it was aftjr an era of comparative stability set in. 



Political Systems of Australia. 561 

The custom which in England draws men to Parliament as the comple- 
ment to or witness of success in professional or business life, was brought 
to Australia by the colonists, though it has now almost passed away. But 
the elements from which the House of Commons still drew its character 
in the middle of the nineteenth century, and which furnished the traditions 
•of political life and the basis of political contests, were incapable of trans- 
mission to those who were so far away from the influences of the " governing 
class." '" Whig " and " Tory " made nothing of the appeal to the Australian 
legislator that they made in a House of Commons where men had not yet 
ceased to talk of " Mr. Fox " and " Mr. Pitt." " Conservative " and 
■" Liberal " temperaments there were in political as in other affairs, finding 
vigorous expression in the newspaper press and readily recognisable in the 
general attitude of Councils and Assemblies respectively. But, in fact, the great 
political questions which divided parties in England — and even in England 
party lines from the repeal of the Corn Laws to the death of Palmerston 
were ill-defined — were hardly issues at all (as the extension and protection 
of political rights, the relations of Church and State), or they had not emerged 
in the social conditions of the country (as the humanitarian movement 
embodied in the Factories Acts, or the protection of industries by Tariffs). 
These conditions were unfavorable to the formation of firm and continuous 
associations for government. The nearest approach to party in the Englisli 
sense was the habit whereby a.ssociations formed for some special purpose 
served as a bond of union for general political action ; and the most perma- 
nent and characteristic of political groups came to be determined by fiscal 
sympathies, even when the fiscal question was not the cjuestion of the hour. 
But the bond was a slight one, and it rarely included as a practical test of 
party loyalty the acceptance of the leadership of some one who could speak 
and act for all. Outside Parliament, party, in the English sense, with its 
accompanying organization, did not exist ; the member counted mainly 
upon his personal influence and popularity in his constituency and his record 
or services to that constituency ; he was without fear of any caucus drawing 
inspiration from head-quarters. Such conditions permit a freedom of political 
action which many to-day may envy. But they are not favorable 
to the smooth working of the cabinet system ; they tend in parti- 
cular to make an assembly a congeries of local interests. It is not 
surprising that in Australia the combinations of politicians for public 
ends were transient and not permanent, and that public life developed 
personal rivalries and jealousies marked with intense bitterness of 
feeling. Ministry followed Ministry with rapid succession, and between 
1856 and 1894 New South Wales had 28 Ministries ; Victoria, 27 ; 
South Australia, 42. 

This condition of tilings would hardly have been tolerable but for three 
facts. In the first place, the limited range of colonial politics demands 
less of " strong " government than is called for in a sovereign State. In the 
second place, there was sufficient of general political agreement in the country 
to insure a steady movement of democratic piogress- — there were few marked 
periods of reaction. In the third place, " government " in a colony is in a 
very large degree administrati )ii, vvliich is not substiintially interfered vvitb 
by political change. 

2 N 2 



562 Federal Handbook. 



In a country whose sparse population and generous distances make 
effective local government impossible, where extensive developmental work 
Las to be undertaken, and where social conditions and opinion combine to 
demand a wide sphere of governmental activity, Parliament readily becomes 
the meeting ground of material interests, where the rural constituencies 
are contending with each other for the expenditure of public money on roads 
and bridges, where the town and country are jealously eyeing each other, 
and where justice to one interest is often possible only by placating a number 
of others. In the condition of the country, these interests had to find repre- 
sentation, and it is useless to quarrel with the fact. The evil lay, of course, 
in their tendency to dominate the situation, to lower the tone of politics, 
and to form a public opinion which found a serious basis in some material 
interest. The last tendency was not diminished by the fact that the greater 
political issues were the disposition of the public lauds and the tariff. 

7. The Labour Party. 

It was the existence in Australia of the gi'eat capitals which eventually 
organized politics on definite lines. At once the seat of government 
and the centre of all business, the point at which substantially her whole 
trade entered and left a colony, each capital brought together a vast 
working-class population with every facility for organization for political 
Fction as soon as the inducement to organize became sufficiently strong. 
During the nineties the Labour Party was chiefly conspicuous as a driving 
force in politics, supporting such Ministries as would promise indu.strial 
legislation or a land tax. In other conditions, the appearance of such a 
" third party " in Parliament would have been a disturbing factor. In 
Australia, however, the advent of the Labour Party appears to have had 
from the first a steadying influence in the Legislature. 

The Party was soon sufficiently strong in numbers generally to hold the 
balance of power, and its strength was beyond its numbers by the '" pledge " 
which bound its members on all vital occasions to cast a solid vote. But 
it was essentially a party striving to achieve results by parliamentary action,, 
not one concerned merely to embarrass and hinder government, while it 
was not strong enough to be under any temptation to make a bid for office, 
and its system forbade coalescence with other parties to form a Ministry. 
So long as it could work fairly well with an existing Ministry, it was content tO' 
criticise it unsp?rngly, but not to withhold its sixpport. It was under these 
conditions that government was carried on in most of the colonies during 
the years immediatol} preceding Federation, and in tn Commonwealth during 
the Ministry of Sir Edmund Barton and the first Ministry of Mr. Deakin. 

As the Labour Party grew in strength till it ceased to be a " third party "■ 
and became the regular Opposition, and later itself came into office, the other 
sections in Parliament were learning something by its example in the way 
of cohesion, discipline, and organization ; while the growing prominence of 
the policy of nationalization, the rigour of the " pledge," and the ascendancy 
of the trades tmions, served to mark out clearer lines of division by allying 
the busin-^ss interests of the towns with the farming interest in the country 
in defence of what could honestly be held as great and permanent principles 
of political conduct and social well-being. 



Political Systems of Australia. 563 

In regard to any political party, as President Lowell has well pointed out, 
the first question is whether it works within or without tlie institutions of 
the country. Tried by this test, we find that the Labour Party is organized 
ior parlianientary action and accepts the main conventions of Cabinet 
Grovernment. But it has certain features of its own which distinguish it 
from the f iniiliar working of the older p^rties in England. 

The caucus of members of the Parliamentary Party — with other parties 
occasional, and usually a signal of distress — is a weekly event during the 
Parliamentary Session ; and from it sometimes spring standing committees 
to watch over departments of public affairs assigned to them. The chairman 
of the caucus becomes the leader of the party in the House, and if he is called 
on to form a Ministry, it is the caucus which determines by ballot the personnel 
of the Government, though the distribution of offices is left to the leader. 
In the caucus also take place the serious debates of the Party in regard to 
its parliamentary action, and here we come to the root of the matter — the 
pledge. Every candidate for nomination as a Labour candidate must, in 
addition to his acceptance of the platform, undertake not to nominate as a 
candidate unless selected by the organization (which involves submission 
of his claims to the same authority before every election), and pledge himself 
to vote in Parliament in all matters affecting the platform as a majority of 
the Parliamentary Party in caucus determines This itself covers a wide 
range of political action ; and practically (and in some cases expressly) 
it extends to all matters of sufficient importance to affect the life of a j\linistry. 
Obviously, a system which commits to a majority the control of the whole 
party vote is one from which much of the moderating and persuasive virtue 
imputed by political writers to " party " has gone out. The pledge and 
the caucus have lost the party many supporters, and are assailed with force 
by opponents. They are defended on the gxound of their efficacy, and if 
experience justifies the claim, opponents will probably end by adopting or 
adapting the system. Already the Liberal Party is making a more general 
use of the caucus, and it is almost accepted that a conciliation conference 
should precede hostile action in Parliament by discontented supporters of a 
Liberal Ministry. Any considerable extension of the system must pro- 
foundly affect the character of Parliamentary Government as heretofore 
understood. 

In place of a Chamber dehberating in public on the affairs of the country, 
we may see a body split into two party delegations, holding their deliberations 
apart and in secret, and meeting in the Chamber merely to record a vote 
determined on in caucus. In England, the feature of the day is the domina- 
tion of the House of Commons by the Cabinet. But in Australia, the preva- 
lence of the caucus would threaten the Cabinet as much as the House. 
Where the caucus elects the Ministry, the regular sessions of the caucus 
must, it would seem, tend to supersede the deliberations of the Cabinet, 
at any rate while Parliament is sitting; to bring Ministerial differences to the 
arbitrament of the party meeting instead of to the Cabinet or the Premier ; 
and to substitute for the collective responsibility of the Cabinet to Parliament 
the individual responsibility of Ministers to the caucus. 

Amongst the methods which have suggested themselves as a means of 
escape from or mitigation of Cabinet domination in England has been a more 



554 Federal Handbook. 



extended use of the committee system, by analogy to the methods of local 
government. It is possible that in Australia the movement is one from 
government by the Cabinet to direct government by the parliamentary 
majority, acting perhaps through committees presided over by a Minister. 

In England the predominance of the Cabinet in the party is fortified by 
the disposition of honours, and by the not inconsiderable patronage which 
still remains to Ministers. In Australia the Cabinet has none of these aids. 
But there is one other factor — the organization of the party in the country. 
In England the party organization outside Parliament has been the fighting 
instrument and the intelligence department of the parliamentary leaders, 
whose officers — the party whips — have controlled the party funds. The 
policy of the party has been formulated by these leaders, who have made 
their own appeal to Parliament and the country. In Australia the Labour 
organization has at once a more formal and a more commanding part. The 
fighting platfoim is the immediate party programme which every parliamen- 
tary candidate must accept, and which, if elected, he is pledged to carry out 
as far as circumstances will permit. This platform is determined on by 
periodical conferences of delegates from branches of the State league. The 
conference also chooses a standing executive, in which members of Parlia- 
ment are not especially prominent, and which, indeed, may easily become 
their censors. The question of responsibihty to the conference was in fact 
raised in 1913 in New South Wales in a fashion which produced a condition 
of acute tension, and threatened a serious disruption of the party, for the 
conference claimed in the most definite way to review the political action of 
the Parliamentary members of the Party, including the Ministry, and to 
punish what it should adjudge to be their shortcomings and want of zeal. 
It remains to be seen whether this claim — which was not generally acknow- 
ledged by members, and was repudiated by Ministers — was merely a sporadic 
outburst, or constitutes a definite development of the system of the Party. 
The success which the Labour Party has won is so much attributed to the 
completeness of its organization, that opponents are moved to imitate it, 
and though among them no organization has attained a strength which 
enables it to dominate policy, the position, taken as a whole, suggests that 
the political centre of gravity is moving away from Parliament. It seems 
possible that Australia may have to follow American and European 
examples of legal recognition of parties, at any rate so as to regn.late the 
process of selecting candidates. 

It is not surprising therefore, that there should be much speculation as to 
the form responsible government may assume in the near future. There are 
on the one hand those whose ideal is that of Cabinet and Parliamentary 
government, with what they deem its essentials — general party loyalty to 
parliamentary leaders, with such freedom of individual action as will maintain 
the deliberative character of Parliament and the responsibility of the Cabinet 
to the representatives of the people, subject to the present power of dissolu- 
tion in the hands of the Government as a means of appeal from the repre- 
sentative to the constituency. From this point of view, pledge, caucus, and 
conference, and the precise and intricate features of the organization, are 
mechanical substitutes for the essential qualities of reason and judgment, 
and have the grave defect of dissipating responsibility. On the other 



Political Systems op Australia. 565 

hand, the election of Ministers in Parliament, fixity of tenure for the life of 
the Parliament, or until the passing of a direct vote of censure, abandon- 
ment of collective responsibility, and abolition of the prerogative of dissolu- 
tion are suggested, and in various combinations find many advocates. 
Such means, it is urged, will secure at once stability in administration and 
freedom in parliamentary action. More recently, journalistic enterprise has 
imported from America or Switzerland the " initiative " and the " referen- 
dum," and Labour leaders have given them a hesitating approval. 
According to this plan, the way of salvation lies in recourse to the direct 
action of the people in the work of legislation. Parliament is frankly 
treated as a mere instrument for recording the people's will ; it is not a 
deliberative assembly of the wise. The organization of parties in Parliament 
is an ineffectual attempt at compromise between two conflicting views of 
government, and the next step in constitutional development is to provide 
machinery whereby an educated democracy may take its part in direct 
government. 

8. Administrative Problems. 

One of the most constant problems of modern government is the relation 
of the political part to the administrative part of the system. The Cabinet 
meets some of the difficulties ; the responsibility of Ministers to the Legis- 
lature permits that they may be intrusted with a considerable discretion, 
and removes from the legislature the temptation of meddling with the detailed 
work of government. The subordination of other officers of Government 
to the Ministers enables the Legislature to treat Ministers as solely responsible. 
Ministers on their part with some show of justice might claim that they 
cannot be responsible for those whom they cannot control ; that, therefore. 
a discretionary power of appointment and dismissal must be in their hands 
if they are to answer tor efficiency in administration. It is unnecessary here 
to recm- to the mischief of political appointments and dismissals in the public 
service ; but it may be pointed out that the restrictions involved in guarding 
against the evil are some charge upon the services of the State. 

In England it has hitherto been found possible to regulate the Civil 
Service without recourse to law, whether as to appointments, promotions, 
or tenure of officials. In Australia, the Public Services are governed by 
elaborate statutory provisions defining the conditions of admission, the 
classification of officers, remuneration, promotion, and discipline. The 
administration of this body of laws is organized under a Public Service Com- 
missioner or Commissioners, whose important functions are recognised by statu- 
tory provisions designed to secure him against Ministerial pressure. Through 
his hands pass appointments and promotions, and one of his principal func- 
tions is to guard against the inflation of the service. In promotions, he 
has to weigh seniority and efficiency, and here lies his main responsibility. 
Any perfunctory performance of his duty will load the liigher ranks of the 
service with indifferent officers ; a painstaking and conscientious selection 
of junior officers is apt to evoke the cry of favoritism. Democratic principle 
rejects any such division of the service as exists in England, where a special 
class of man is introduced after a severe and competitive educational test 
to fill the higher offices. In Australia, the entrance examination for all 



566 Federal Handbook. 



candidates is not a very convincing test of ability or education ; the succes- 
sive ranks are filled by promotion from below according to rules which limit 
the area of selection. For professional or technical positions there is greater 
freedom of choice, and the tendency appears to be to give to the chief of such 
officers in a Department the functions of a permanent head. The establish- 
ment of the Commonwealth Government and the need for organizing Depart- 
ments before the passing of a Public Service Act gave the opportunity 
for securing some of the best ability available whether within or without 
the services of the States ; and the expansion of public activities calling 
for the creation of new branches or Departments from time to time gives 
similar opportunities to both Commonwealth and State. The Commonwealth 
Public Service Act is emphatic in its insistence upon efficiency and its rele- 
gation of seniority to a subordinate position. 

There has been no indication in Australia of any tendency to make use 
of the Public Service as the election agency for Ministers, as appears to be 
common in some countries. Any such tendency, if it had existed, would 
probably have been checked effectually by the elimination of direct political 
control under the Public Service Acts. But the relation of public servants 
to politics has engaged serious attention in Australia, as in all other communi- 
ties where the solidarity of interest in a large body stimulates common action 
for the protection or promotion of that interest, and where from the nature 
of the case organization is peculiarly easy. The Parliament of Victoria 
was, in 1903, so far impressed with the perversion of the public interest 
which might arise from the pressure of public officers upon members of 
Parliament and Mnisters that the whole Public Service, including the rail- 
way service, was removed from the territorial divisions for electoral piirposes, 
and was formed into special constituencies. This, however, was repealed 
in 1906. In the Commonwealth and in New South Wales, the public servants 
have the benefit of the Arbitration Law, and, as has been seen, the Common- 
wealth has made more than one attempt to bring the State railway servants 
under Commonwealth control. Such measures are based on the view that, 
as Government can hardly concede to its servants the right to strike, it is 
bound to provide them with the means of laying their claims before an 
indifferent tribunal, and that a legitimate mode of pressing these claims 
serves to remove the subject from the political and parliamentary arena, 
where it would be determined less according to its merits than according 
to the amount of effective pressure which could be applied at the moment. 

Generally, the usual restrictions are imposed upon the political activities 
of public officers. But in the case of the Commonwealth, the Labour Gov- 
ernment in 1909 removed these restrictions and left the Comnaonwealth 
service free to engage in the ordinary political action of citizens, subject 
to a prohibition against commenting upon the administration of any Com- 
monwealth Department and disclosing or making use of official information. 

Within the Departments, IMinisters in Australia probably concern them- 
selves far more with detail than do Ministers in England. Whether this 
in all cases conduces to a more real contiol over the policy of the Department 
may be doubted. 

The desire to eliminate " political influence " from administration has not 
been confined to the matter of the Civil Service. There are many matters 



Political Systems of Australia. 567 

undertaken by Grovernment which call for special expert ability, others 
which demand an unbiassed judgment in dealing with conflicting interests. 
This has been recognised in varying degrees as imposing limitations upon 
the sphere of the political part of Government, so as to promote efficiency 
in management (as in the case of State railways) or to avoid the intrusion 
of the miscellaneous factors which necessarily enter into any pohtical 
judgment. The management of the railways is vested in Commissioners 
with large powers of independent action, combining the functions of managers 
with many of the powers of a Board of Directors. The relations between 
the Minister and the Courts in such a system are delicate, and are occasionally 
strained. Parliament, which has to find the money for any railway deficit, 
must have control over commitments to large expenditure ; the relations 
between the Courts and their stafi may call for the interference of the 
Government and Parliament as a matter of national policy. But this public 
and occasional interference is not open to the objections attaching to Minis- 
terial management with the constant pressure of political considerations. 
Railway construction may be either an incident of management or a matter 
of policy. After some hesitation, it has been treated as a matter of policy, 
the more particularly as in Australia the construction of railways must be 
viewed not merely as a business enterprise but as a means of developing 
national resources. 

On the one hand, Parliament is entitled to determine the place of 
railway construction amongst the various claimants for public expenditure, 
and to determine the order in which the various railway schemes are to be 
undertaken, as well as to judge of the plan of the work, so far as concerns, 
e.g., estimates of cost. On the other hand, there is no matter in which the 
decision of a political authority, w^h ether Minister or Assembly, is more liable 
to be affected by influences outside the merits of the case. The position 
has been recognised by some States in the establishment of a Standing 
Parliamentary Committee to which all but insignificant schemes of railway 
construction are referred for investigation and report, and which performs 
functions analogous to those of the private bill committees of the Lords 
and Commons. 

The principles applied in the case of the railways are applied in greater 
or less degree in other business relations between the State and the citizens, 
first as a means of securing efficient management, and, secondly, as a means 
of ousting illegitimate influences. The Savings Banks of the States and the 
Commonwealth Bank are illustrations. Similarly, in the administration 
of the intricate body of laws for the regulation of the Crown lands, it 
has been found advisable in some cases to constitute semi- judicial and 
special Boards with carefully defined statutory powers for dealing with the 
resumption of lands for closer settlement and the management and rating 
of irrigation areas. The disbm'sement of funds by the central Government 
for the construction and maintenance of roads is another matter which 
hovers between independent management and political action. The Inter- 
State Commission, established by the Labour Government in 1912, has 
an immense range of powers in relation to Inter-State trade and commerce, 
and is, after the railways, the most important case of the use of an independent 
body in administration. Some of the powers of the Commission arise under 



568 Federal Handbook. 



the Constitution itself — a finding of the Commission is in certain cases made 
a condition of Commonwealth action. In other cases, the Commission is 
intrusted with the amplest powers of investigation, upon the results of which 
may be based legislative or administrative action, or judicial proceedings. 
In particular, the Commission is charged with a constant surveillance over 
the operation of the Customs Tariff, avowedly that Parliament may act 
upon authentic information and unprejudiced advice in reconciling the 
several interests which a Tariff, especially a protective Tariff, affects. The 
Commission is in many respects assimilated to a Court of Justice, and its 
members, though appointed only for a term of years, have during that term 
the security of a High Court Judge. It has been stated that the Liberal 
Government which assumed office in 1913 proposes to vest the management 
of the postal and telegraphic services in a body of Commissioners modelled 
as to status and functions upon the Eailway Commissioners. 

The existence of these semi-independent authorities involves in many 
cases great complexity of function and relation, with the possibility of sharp 
conflict between them and Ministers. Ultimately, it involves very difficult 
constitutional questions as to the responsibility of Ministers for the exercise 
of statutory powers vested in particular bodies or officers. Usually there 
are left in the Ministry powers wliich in the last resort will make the political 
view prevail ; but the country has the safeguard that such interference is an 
extraordinary and not an ordinary exercise of power, that it almost necessarily 
takes place in circumstances which insiu'e publicity, and that it must there- 
fore be based on reasons on which the Ministry can rely as a justification of 
its action. 

Local government in Australia is entirely the creation of Statute, but 
so far as it goes it carries the tradition of local government in England — 
that is, it is viewed as local self-government and not as the instrument of the 
central Government. In fact, there is in Australia less of the utilization 
of the machinery of local government for national purposes than there is in 
Great Britain. Police (together with the maintenance of prisons and the 
cost of justice) and education are services organized and controlled by central 
departments, and the exjjenditure is provided for by Parliament. The same 
is true of asylums. There is no poor law, but a considerable charity vote 
is usually granted by Parliament, and the subsidizing of benevolent insti- 
tutions and the relief of unemployment are regarded as State rather than 
municipal matters. Old-age pensions were provided by the State Parlia- 
ments, and their administration was undertaken by the central departments ; 
they are now, with invalid pensions and the maternity bonus, administered 
by the Commonwealth Government through officers responsible to it. As 
the railways are in the hands of the State Governments, those Governments- 
are brought into closer relation than elsewhere with the internal communi- 
cations of the country; roads and bridges are important feeders of the railways. 
Moreover, these communications are of course essential to development, 
and are often most urgently called for where there is least ability to bear 
a local charge ; and historically there is a connexion between land revenue 
and local works. Large amounts of money have been expended directly 
by the central Government both out of loans and revenue ; and there are 
roads and other works, distinguished as " national " from those controlled 



Political Systems of Australia. 569 

by local authorities. In general, roads are now made and maintained by 
the shires or municipalities, with the aid of a Government grant. It is 
questioned whether this system altogether insures recognition by the muni- 
cipalities of the national purposes for which the subsidy is paid, and recent- 
legislation in Victoria is aimed at bringing main roads under a much more 
direct control through the establishment of a non-political board. 

A large part of Australia is now included in local government areas ; but 
it is obvious that the effectiveness of local government must vary with the 
widely different conditions of settlement in the several States. In the 
capitals and other urban areas, government is organized upon familiar lines, 
and undertakes the obvious services required by large town communities. 
Both in Sydney and Melbourne, the existence of a large number of muni- 
cipalities within the metropolitan district involves the creation of some 
authorities which control services not admitting of separation, of which 
sewerage and water supply are the most important. 

9. The Courts and the Constitution. 

The general principle of the division of powers between Commonwealth 
and State, as already stated, is that the Commonwealth received authority 
over certain matters specifically enumerated, while the Constitution 
reserved to the States the residuary power : the federal plan is that of 
the United States Constitution. 

Federal government, with its division of power between two authorities, 
demands some method of settling the frontiers and determining the rival 
claims. It rests upon the assumption of a controlling law, and therefore a 
sovereignty above each of the governments concerned. In such a system 
government is in a peculiar degree based on law ; as Professor Dicey has 
said, " Federalism is legalism." How that controlling law manifests itself 
in action will depend largely upon the history and traditions of a country ; 
it does not necessarily, as the cases of Germany and Switzerland show, find 
expression in the arbitrament of the ordinary courts of law. But amongst 
people bred under the influence of the English common law, the control of 
the law has meant in Australia, as in America, the submission of the Constitu- 
tion, with its definitions of and limitations on authority, to the interpretation 
of the courts. In countries where the idea of law is more abstract, it may 
be possible to conceive a constitution existing in an atmosphere outside 
that of the courts, and yet with a legal and not merely a moral or conven- 
tional obligation. But though the British Constitution and its offspring 
know well constitutional rules which are not cognisable in the courts, they 
deny them the name of laws. That is law which is enforced in the courts ; 
for that which is not enforced in courts, English legal philosophy does not 
readily find a name. Even in Germany, with a legal philosophy widely 
diffused through her government, the idea of law, unsupported in consti- 
tutional relations by the action of the tribunals, appears to be giving way 
before the tendency of the self-determining legislature to augment its powers. 

A system in which the courts of law are called upon in the course of their 
ordinary business to consider the validity of Acts of Parliament is strange 
to those who live under the rule of parliamentary sovereignty, and in commu- 
nities whose constitutions were modelled on (Ik; Imperial Parliament the 



570 Federal Handbook. 



adjustment to a new order has been not without some difficulties and heart- 
burnings. The principle, indeed, was universally accepted. The rule 
that Imperial Acts applying to a colony are of paramount authority was 
familiar enough ; and it was obvious that if two legislatures with authority 
over the same matter spoke with a discordant voice, the courts could not 
give effect to the will of both, and must hold that one prevails over the other. 
The occasions for such a conflict of Imperial legislation with colonial legis- 
lation under " responsible government " were few. In the case of a federal 
constitution where the powers of the central Legislature were in general 
not exclusive, but concurred with powers of the States Legislatures, such 
conflicts must be of constant occurrence ; and the Constitution expressly 
provided that in such a case the laws of the Commonwealth should prevail. 
In this class of case the task of the courts has been to determine what is 
inconsistency, a more difficult task than appears on the surface. But in 
order that a Commonwealth Statute shall prevail or, indeed, operate at all, 
it must be a " law," i.e., not merely passed by Parliament, but within 
the powers committed to Parliament by the Constitution. Inasmuch as the 
Constitution itself is an Act of the Imperial Parliament, it is a law of para- 
mount authority to which the courts must give effect. Where it says that 
such and such a power only shall be exercised, the courts must give eflect 
to the limitation, and treat any excess of the grant as ultra vires. Thus the 
courts have the more delicate task of interpreting and defining the limits of 
the powers of the Commonwealth as often as in any litigation before them 
any such power is invoked. Further, the Constitution, although it is not 
the origin of the powers of the States Parliaments, restricts their powers in 
various ways, and therefore the Courts must consider whether acts of 
the States Legislatures or executives are within the authority left to them 
by the Constitution. Lastly, a written Constitution is no more than a 
frame of government — a certain generality and breadth of description belongs 
to its very nature. " A Constitution to contain an accurate detail of all the 
subdivisions of which its great powers will admit, and of all the means by 
which they may be carried into execution, would partake of the prolixity 
of a legal code, and could scarcely be embraced by the human mind. It 
would probably never be understood by the public. Its nature requires 
therefore that only its great outlines should be marked, its more important 
objects designated, and the minor ingredients which compose those objects 
be deduced from the nature of the objects themselves" {per Marshall, C.J., 
McCulloch V. Manjland (1819) )4 Wheaton 316). British Statutes are charac- 
terized by a high degree of detail which invites the courts to a literal and 
unimaginative interpretation. A Constitution, on the other hand, is brief, 
allusive, the expression of some clearly discernible principles of government. 
These have to be worked out in application, and their consequences cannot 
at the outset be foreseen. Actually, the implications of a Constitution are 
not less important than its explicit dispositions. Constitutional construc- 
tion, therefore, involves a peculiar responsibility, not merely because of the 
importance of the subject, but because of the special nature of the task. 
The courts must adjust themselves to a new stand-point. The task before 
them resembles less the interpretation of an Act of Parliament than the 
development of the common law. In the case of a federal Constitution, it 



Political Systems of Australia. 571 

has an analogy to the process by which large departments of the law have 
been built up to contain " the unexpressed intention of the parties " in 
contract. 

It is obvious that such functions as these have a vast political significance, 
and a system which casts them on the courts raises several grave questions. 
Are judges with their training well-fitted for the determination of these 
matters ? One advantage a man of large professional experience possesses : 
he is accustomed to a detachment from mere personal views and sympathies 
in his professional judgment and conduct. But something more is needful; 
in the words of Marshall, "the judge must mingle with the lawyer's rigour 
the statesman's breadth of view."' In the region of implied powers and implied 
restraints the legal landmarks become faint ; in the interpretation of some 
vague indefinite power, political battle cries are like siren's songs. When 
great political issues hang on a judicial decision, the whole political interest 
of the community is ranged on the one side and the other, and by tradition 
the defeated litigant is not in a generous mood towards the court. More- 
over, in making judicial appointments, Governments can hardly avoid 
giving some weight to the prospective attitude of the judge towards con- 
stitutional matters, and there is the temptation to subordinate unduly other 
considerations of fitness to this. The system is obviously one which puts a 
strain upon the Bench, the Executive, the Parliament, and public 
opinion. 

But it is easier to point to drawbacks than to suggest a remedy if the 
reality of Federal Govei-nment is to be preserved. The frank acceptance 
of political in place of legal control involves either the paramountcy of one 
of the Governments concerned or of some authority external to both. In 
the United States, this was impossible. In Canada, the system is mixed — 
both Dominions and Pro\ances are subject to legal control through the 
courts, while the Provinces are subject also to the political control of the 
Dominion Government, which may disallow their legislation. In Australia 
and Canada, there is the resource of submitting some at any rate of these 
great questions to the political control of the Imperial Government, which 
has the same power of disallowance ; and at the beginnings of the Australian 
Constitution there was in fact a moment's hesitation as to the proper mode 
of working out some of the problems of federalism. The Supreme Court of 
Victoria and the Privy Council on appeal looked askance at the American 
decisions as political wolves in legal sheepskin, and, rejecting all implied 
restraints on power in law, sought to reconcile the plenary powers of a Par- 
liament with that mutual forbearance which federalism demands, by reference 
to the political supremacy of the Imperial Government and the Imperial 
Parliament, as a means of preventing encroachment by the one authmity 
upon the other. Perhaps the most notable decision of the High Court is 
that in which it rejected this easy means of avoiding responsibilities ; held 
that the delimitation of spheres was a legal question as to the existence of 
power, and not a political ({uestion as to the proper use of powers ; and 
declared that a view which would refer questions of everv-day action to the 
supervision of the Imperial Government was a negation of that self-govern- 
ment to which all Australia was accustomed, and was totally inconsistent with 
the notorious purpose of the Constitution to enlarge that self-government. 



572 Federal Handbook. 



It was in the same case that the High Court vindicated its own position 
under the Constitution as against what it deemed the encroachment of the 
Privy Council. 

The constitutional importance of the High Court of Australia arises from 
the fact that it is the supreme court of appeal in Australia, and that on con- 
stitutional matters, within sec. 74 of the Constitution, no appeal lies to the 
Privy Council except where the High Court for special reasons certifies that 
the question is one which ought to be determined by the King in Council. 
The peculiar prominence which eveaits have given to the High Court brings 
us to a particular consideration of the subjects in the power of Commonwealth 
and State respectively. 

10. Commonwealth and State Functions. 

In the sphere of Federal authority, precedence must be accorded 
to the matters of defence and fiscal relations. Here the State 
services of Defence and Customs were wholly transferred to the exclusive 
authority of the Commonwealth Parliament. Subject to the constitutional 
provision of inter-state free-trade, power was given to make laws with 
respect to external and inter-state commerce. Two other State services, 
closely connected with external commerce — lighting and buoying, and 
quarantine — were also transferred, as was the post office, with the 
telegraphs and telephones. Of the 39 subjects granted to the Common 
wealth Parliament, some, like "' external affairs," " immigration," 
" naturalization and aliens," point to the established need of a single voice 
to speak for Australia in her external relations. Others, such as trade- 
marks and patents, banking and bills of exchange, go some way towards 
bringing " commercial law " into federal hands. Currency and coinage are 
always regarded as fittest for a central authority, and in Australia the 
power of the Commonwealth Parliament is fortified by prohibitions to the 
States. Weights and measures are federal for like reasons. Marriage and 
divorce are suggested by warnings from the United States. Alone amongst 
the miscellaneous powers, " invalid and old-age pensions " and an arbitra- 
tion power to deal with industrial disputes passing the boundaries of any 
one State, were calculated to make any wide appeal to political feeling. 

From the nature of the case, it is not possible to define the States' powers 
by enumeration. But the residuary power includes such important matters 
of administration as the lands, public health, mining, railways, education, 
police, and local government ; the whole law of property and most civil 
rights ; all trade and commerce, except foreign and inter-state commerce ; 
and all industry and industrial relations except so far as they may be brought 
into the Commonwealth sphere of conciliation and arbitration by the existence 
of some form of dispute extending beyond the limits of any one State. The 
State power thus embraces those social matters which in all modern countries 
are arousing the deepest concern, as well as those matters of public economy 
which in a new country engross the greatest amount of public attention 
and constitute in ordinary times the politics of a dependency. 

According to the view current at the time of the establishment of the 
Commonwealth, the task which lay before the Government at the outset 
was no doubt a heavy one. The organization of the transferred Departments 



Political Systems of Australia. 573 

carried with it the need for replacing the varying laws of administration 
of the States by an uniform law, work of an essentially departmental kind 
in which Parliament would concern itself but little, and the public not at all. 
Defence, on the other hand, called for constructive statesmanship, but in 
1900 gave little promise of prolonged or keen political interest. Then there 
was trade and commerce, as to which the Constitution imposed on the Par- 
liament the task of framing an uniform tariff for Australia within two years, 
and declared that on the accomplishment of that task, inter-state free 
trade should be established. The fiscal question was thus the burning ques- 
tion, which in the first instance defined the lines of parliamentary parties, 
ranged old opponents against each other in familiar contest, brought out 
old conflicts of interest, and, from the divergent policies of New South Wales 
and Victoria, gave to the struggle something of an inter-state character. 
But even in regard to the tariff, there was a general desire to effect a settle- 
ment, and to relieve trade from the hindrance of a fluctuating policy. That 
matter settled, everything pointed to calm in the federal sphere, and there 
was room for reasonable doubt whether federal politics when the first work 
was done and the glamour of the inauguration departed, would be sufficiently 
stirring to attract the more robust type of politician, or to command a live 
public interest. 

The actual history of the Commonwealth during its twelve years of life 
has been very different from the anticipation. The sessions of Parliament 
have been as long as those of the States ; its proceedings have been con- 
tentious enough to produce the closure in its various forms ; Ministries have 
followed each other in rapid succession — the Ministry which took office in 
June, 1913, is the tenth Government of the Commonwealth ; elections have 
stirred the depths of political feeling and have called out the most strenuous 
efforts of party organization, with the result of raising the percentage of 
electors voting from 46.86 in 1901 to 73.43 in 1913 ; and the issues which 
have led to this public interest are exactly those which were regarded as 
outside federal politics. In several cases, the successful passage of an Act 
through Parliament has been only a stage in the conflict, which has been taken 
up in the courts, and eventually been passed on to the electors through 
proposals for the alteration of the Constitution so as to invest the Parliament 
with additional powers. 

11. The Development of the Federal Constitution. 

The first important constitutional principle laid down by the Higii 
Court was that if either Commonwealth or State attempted to give 
to its legislative or executive authority an operation which would 
fetter or interfere with the free exercise of the legislative or executive 
power of the other, the attempt unless clearly authorized by the 
Constitution was invalid. This doctrine, first laid down in favour of 
the salaries of Commonwealth officers against the taxation of the States, 
was applied to protect the States against the application of the Commonwealth 
Arbitration Act to disputes between the States Governments and their 
servants employed on the State railways. The second gi-eat principle was 
that, the Constitution having divided powers of Government between Com- 
monwealth and States, the powers of the Commonwealth must Ix' interpreted 



574 Federal Handbook. 



consistently with the maintenance of the division, and therefore if a par- 
ticular grant of power to the Commonwealth would according to one con- 
struction extend m substance to nullify that division and to give to the 
Commonwealth a general paramount authority, it must be rejected in favour 
of a more restricted application, consistent with the general scheme. This 
principle was first explicitly enunciated in connexion with what was known 
as the " new protection " — the policy of guaranteeing to the employes in 
protected industries the advantageous conditions which protection made 
possible. The difficulty was for the Commonwealth to accomplish this 
under a Constitution which left the regulation of industry to the States. 
By an ingenious use of the power of taxation, the customs duties were in 
certain cases balanced by an excise, remissible on proof of compliance with 
specified labour conditions. In the High Court this Act was challenged by a 
taxpayer, and a majority of the Court held it was ultra vires : in substance 
the Act was not one of taxation at all, it was a regulation of industry ; and if 
the power of taxation sanctioned what had here been done the same device 
would enable the Commonwealth to regulate anything whatsoever, and so 
make the federal scheme illusory. Developing the same doctrine, the Court 
in subsequent cases emphasized the fact that in the region of commerce the 
Constitution which granted to the Commonwealth the subject of foreign 
and inter-state commerce, impliedly forbade it to regulate the domestic 
commerce of the States. The application of these doctrines was fatal to the 
attempt to establish the Union Label under the cover of a Trade Marks Act ; 
to regulate the contracts of corporations under the AustraUan Industries 
Act ; to establish a common rule affecting all employers in a particular industry 
under the Arbitration Act. It also limited the operation of the Arbitration 
Act in various respects, and ixi particular established that the Commonwealth 
Court of Arbitration in its awards was subject and not paramount to State 
laws. Finally, it limited the scope of the Commonwealth's power of inquiry 
by Royal Commissions to matters within the present power of the Common- 
wealth Parliament, and prevented the inquiries extending to matters within 
the exclusive authority of the States. Most of these matters had been the 
subject of keen parliamentary contests, which included a severe questioning 
of their legality. In the High Court itself, after the number of justices had 
been raised from three to five, there appeared a sharp division of opinion 
on the Bench as to fundamental principles on interpretation, and the two 
new justices commonly dissented from the respect paid by the majority to 
the reserved powers of the States. 

The differences on the Bench illustrate the peculiar difficulty of the 
Australian situation. The Constitution has two sources — one American and 
one British. The federal element in the Constitution is that which is drawn 
from America ; and the essentials of federaUsm were developed in the Supreme 
Court of the United States in conditions which precluded any exaggerated 
regard for the acts of Legislatures as such. The principle of people's 
sovereignty imported that all Legislatures held their powers by delegation 
and upon a trust. The Constitutions, Federal and State, were full of express 
restraints upon legislative competence in the interest of individual right, 
and, apart from such provisions, the doctrine of natural rights affected 
(and continues to affect) legal as well as political thought. In Australia, 



Political Systems of Australia. 575 

most of these conditions were absent, and though the American model has 
furnished the federal relation in her Constitution, her Legislatures have the 
traditional attributes of British parliamentary institutions so far as these 
are possible in a non-sovereign community. Here, then, are two principles 
co-existing in the same Constitution, and each admittedly demanding some 
concession from the other. The question is — how much ? Which is the 
preponderating principle — federalism or parliamentary sovereignty ? The 
majority of the High Court has considered that federalism is the governing 
principle, and has sought its guide chiefly in the decisions of the United 
States, while recognising that in many matters there are diSercnces which 
prevent the analogy from being perfect. The minority on the other hand has 
rested more on British traditions, and has relied on the principles laid down 
by the Privy Council in cases concerning immediately Governments either 
unitary in form or, like the Dominion of Canada, based on a different federation 
from that of Australia. 

This has been the character of the legal contest. The political conflict 
has necessarily been waged in a less refined atmosphere. 

On the policy of the " new protection " indeed there was little difference 
of opinion. Free-traders and protectionists alike were in agreement that 
where the law secured a market for the manufacturer by high duties, the law 
should not leave the employes to a competitive wage. The question was as 
to the mode in which the aim should be attained. Already there were in 
all but one of the States authorities for determiniug fair and reasonable wages, 
who in considering what wages an industry could bear would take into account 
the extent of protection which the employer enjoyed against foreign compe 
tition. But here another industrial problem arose from the establishment 
of inter-state free trade. A State authority could fix wages only within 
the State, and employers there were exposed to unrestricted competition 
from other States in which the labour conditions might be less onerous. The 
fear was excited that either the least favorable conditions for labour might 
be the standard for regulation generally, or industry might flow from the 
States with high wages to those with low wages. Unsuccessful efforts to meet 
the situation through a voluntary surrender of limited but sufficient powers 
by the States to the Commonwealth are the contribution of Liberal policy 
towards the solution of the problem. Labour finds in it a proof of the unity 
of Australian industrial conditions and bases on it a demand for unlimited 
federal control. 

Another important factor in the situation has been the Commonwealth 
Arbitration Court. Designed by the framers of the Constitution for dealing 
with the rare case of industrial crises of national magnitude, the Court has 
come to be sought by the trades unions in preference to State machinery, 
and has become the most active of the industrial authorities in the Common- 
wealth. The definition of its powers and functions had been the most con- 
tentious of the tasks of the High Court. Unable to limit the terms of the 
Constitution to the class of case originally contemplated, the High Court has 
yet to give effect to the fact that the Constitution does impose some limits 
on the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth Arbitration Court. In the result, 
distinctions become very fine ; differences of opinion emerge in the High Court ; 
and the discontents of those who find barriers impeding their access to the 
C.121.54 t u 



576 Federal Handbook. 



Arbitration Court are joined to a feeling of grievance and irritation at what 
is deemed the artificial treatment of great issues. 

12. Constitution Amendment. 

The most potent factor in the political development of the Common- 
wealth has been the democratic nature of the Constitution, so that 
politicians aiming at great social and economic changes have seen before 
them an open way unbarred by the Legislative Councils in the States. 
The Labour Party has come to concentrate its main efforts upon federal 
politics, to use or compel the use of federal powers for purposes which make 
the Commonwealth Parliament and Commonwealth elections the scene of 
the modern social and industrial conflict. The decisions of the High Court 
having marked out the limits of attainment within the Constitution, the 
amendment of the Constitution has become the immediate objective of Labour 
politics and the " preservation of the Constitution " a rallying cry of their 
opponents. 

The Labour Party, on assuming office in 1910, set themselves at once to 
free the Constitution from the limitations settled by the High Court decisions, 
and passed through Parliament a measure for altering the Constitution so 
as to bring under federal control all commerce and industry, including the 
regulation of commercial trusts, and the whcle subject of labour and employ- 
ment. A separate measure proposed to enable the Commonwealth to 
nationalize any business declared by Parliament to be a monopoly. The 
proposals were submitted to the electors by referendum in 1911, and were 
decisively rejected. In 1913 the proposals were again laid before the electors 
at the time of the general election, and were again rejected, though by slender 
majorities only. The use of a general election for a referendum is tempting 
for many reasons, but it may detract from its value as an expression of public 
opinion on the measures submitted. Practically the short Australian ex- 
perience appears to show that where measures for the alteration of the Con- 
stitution are promoted by a Government which is asking generally for a re- 
newal of the confidence of the people, the electors will not separate the pro- 
posals from the Government, and their " yes " in the referendum goes along 
with their votes for Government candidates for the Senate and the House 
as their " no " goes with votes for the Opposition. In 1913, the referenda 
dominated all other matters as a subject of political discussion, while the 
personal issues of the election applied a stimulus which brought electors to 
the poll. 

It has been said that the most important part of any Constitution is the 
provision for its alteration. Constitutions have been conceived as voluntary 
grants by the ruler, as compacts between rulers and people, as agreements of 
the people, and as direct expressions of a national will. A nation's concept 
of sovereignty is usually to be found in the provision for the alteration of 
its Constitution. In the Australian Constitution, the principles of parliamen- 
tary government, of democracy, and of federalism which run through the 
whole instrument are at work in the amending clause. Parliament has the 
sole initiative, and in this case must act by absolute majority. The 
possibility of disagreement between the Houses is provided for, and the 
provision differs significantly from that applicable to ordinary legislation. 



Political Systems of Australia. 577 



The ordinary dead-lock machinery is available only in the case of bills 
passed by the House and rejected by the Senate, evidently contemplating 
conditions familiar in Cabinet Government. In regard to proposals 
to alter the Constitution, however, bills emanating from the Senate- — 
the House of the States — as well as those originating in the House, have 
the advantage of the dead-lock machinery. Moreover, that machinery 
in the case of Constitution alterations is far more simple than that 
applicable to ordinary legislation, for it dispenses altogether with the double 
dissolution. It is enough that a Bill passed twice in one House has been 
twice rejected by the other ; in such a case it may be at once submitted to 
the electors for their approval. The reason for the difference in the schemes 
is that ordinary legislation is essentially a function of ParHament, and the 
reference to the people is made only as a last resort after the failure of all 
other methods of reconcilement. In the case of alterations of the Consti- 
tution, the people are not mere arbiters between the Houses ; they are 
themselves participators in the Act. Federalism has invoked the " political 
sovereign " — the electors — to assume a part in the " legal sovereignty." It 
was the people of the Australian colonies who adopted the Constitution ; 
without their approval no alteration in it can be made. 

The alteration of a federal constitution is a revision of a compact between 
the constituent States. It is, therefore, reasonable to expect some recogni- 
tion of this in the machinery for approving such alterations. This, in Aus- 
tralia, is effected as in Switzerland in conjunction with the submission to the 
people. An alteration of the Constitution requires a national and a federal 
majority — a majority of the whole number of electors of the Commonwealth 
who have recorded their votes, and a majority of States, the latter ascertained 
by the votes cast by the electors in the several States for or against the pro- 
posal. The Parliamentary representation and the territorial integrity of the 
Stat( s are protected by the further provision requiring the assent of a 
State's electors to any alteration therein. 

The direct participation of the electorate in the act of amending the Con- 
stitution is no doubt a dethronement of Parliament. But the principle 
which governs the mode of alteration is in truth derived from parliamentary 
government. There is no attempt to see into the distant future, to provide 
by superior wisdom for generations which might not know so well how to 
govern themselves. The framers of the Constitution were themselves accus- 
tomed to the flexibility of constitutional arrangements ; they were them- 
selves the product of a dynamic age and society, well aware that rigidity 
was not the same thing as stability. They knew, too, that while the people 
of Australia might accept a regime of law, that law must be consistent with 
their sense of self-government : it must no more be the dead hand of their 
own past than the decree of an external authority. 

In America, the artificial majorities required by the Constitution and the 
inequality of population in the several States, combine to make large amend- 
ments in the Constitution impossible and create a problem which suggests 
desperate solutions. In the absence of amendment, the courts control the 
situation in a way which recalls the constitutional struggles of the seventeenth 
century in England, as even more do some of the remedies suggested. The 
judges are invited to make a more political and less legal interpretation ; 



578 Federal Handbook. 



even to treat the Constitution as something greater or something less than a 
legal text — an enunciation of principles capable of indejBuite modification in 
the face of changed social and economic conditions, and of changing political 
ideas concerning the relations of government to the citizen. Grave and 
responsible writers discuss, in ominous conjunction with these suggestions, 
plans for hindering the courts from pronouncing judgment against the 
validity of statutes, or for securing decisions favorable to their validity — 
special modes of constituting the bench ; judicial appointments in relation 
to the power of overruHng prior decisions ; election of judges ; a less secure 
tenure ; removal by the Legislature or recall by popular vote, and replacement 
by " progressive " minds. 

The Australian Constitution, by the ease with which it can be amended, 
leaves the courts no such final control. They are under no necessity to resort 
to bold or ingenious constructions to meet the political conditions of the 
country. If their decision is adverse to an Act of Parliament, it need be no 
more than a suspensory veto, which, if not in accord with the national will, 
can be readily set aside by an alteration of the Constitution conferring upon 
Parliament the powers desired. As already stated, the appeals which have 
been made to the country to alter the Constitution as interpreted by the High 
Court, have not met with success. 

13. Imperial Relations. 

The principle of responsible government was the division of functions 
between two authorities, each of which was answerable for its own 
sphere. The Colonial Government was solely answerable to its citizens 
for the internal affairs of the colony. Whatever touched the external 
relations of the colony — with the mother country, with other colonies, or 
with foreign States — ^was Imperial, which meant that it was in the hands of 
the British Government. Yrt it was evident that in spite of the 
limitation of the colonial functions, some internal affairs might in certain 
contingencies assume an Imperial character ; there must, therefore, be a reserve 
authority in the British Government of a controlling or supervisory kind. 
Attempts to state the division with legal precision were discouraged, and 
the scheme was consequently left free to develop through the course of 
political events. Time has done its work. The growth of the Colonies in 
population, wealth, and importance has been accompanied with a continually 
expanding sphere of self-government. One after another matters once 
deemed " Imperial " have been relegated to the Colonies, whose altered 
status has been recognised by distinguishing them as "Dominions." The 
alteration of their Constitutions is a right which in the Australian Colonies 
was recognised as early as 1850, and is conceded to every representative 
Legislature by the Colonial Laws Validity Act of 1865. By successive 
steps the self-governing Colonies have come to control their commercial 
relations with other parts of the world, whether within or without the Em- 
pire. The currency, marriage and divorce laws, the exercise of the pardoning 
power, the conditions of naturalization, admission and expulsion from the 
territory, the care of native races, have all passed into self-government. 
In the sphere of commerce, the Dominions are treated as distinct units, 
standing outside commercial treaties unless they assent to them, denouncing 



Political Systems of Australia. 579 

them when they think fit, and in substance negotiating with foreign powers. 
In matters of shipping, they exercise direct control over the coastal trade and 
over vessels registered in the colony, and the British Government has practi- 
cally abandoned control for such representations as it might make to a 
foreign state. The Dominions maintain their own defence forces, and control 
them even on the high seas. In the case of political treaties, the Empire is 
necessarily treated as a single unit ; but it is recognised that no treaty par- 
ticularly affecting the interests of a Dominion shall be concluded without 
consultation, and the Arbitration Treaties of 1908 and 1911 and the Pecuniary 
Claims Treaty of 1911 with the United States went so far as to provide for 
the separate assent of any Dominion affected by any question to be referred 
to arbitration. 

In practice, then, the Dominion of the twentieth century by no means 
confines itself to " internal affairs." Each has its own distinctive problems 
in relation to the world without it, and is busy fashioning a policy to solve 
them. The organization of defence has been stimulated by a consideration 
of the special risks to which the situation and the policy of the Dominion 
exposed her. The old conception of "responsible government" is inadequate 
and seeks a new terminology and a new interpretation. Dependency on the 
mother country is superseded by the " voluntary co-operation " or " partner- 
ship " of the sisters ; the " colonies " have become " the nations " ; the 
Dominion's Ministers periodically assemble as "colleagues" of the British 
Ministers in an Imperial Conference, and are there admitted to the most 
secret matters of State. Where does all this tend ? According to one view, 
the movement is towards a system of voluntary alliances, and true statesman- 
ship lies in removing all obstructions to nationhood. It must be recognised 
that every " nation " has the right to make what arrangements it deems 
necessary for the welfare of its inhabitants and the government of its terri- 
tory, even though they are detrimental to those of other nations within or 
without the Empire. These include arrangements of trade, the determina- 
tion of the persons who shall be received as settlers, and the terms on which 
they shall be received. Each of the nations must assume the responsibility 
for its own defence, and must maintain and control its own forces. One by 
one the ties which bind the nations to a British Cabinet and Parliament will 
fall away, until the sole legal bond will be the common and equal subjection 
of all to the Crown. The new relation would be neither supremacy nor 
federation, but an equal alliance which would leave intact the sovereign 
right of each ally to act upon her own responsibility in foreign affairs in the 
last resort. 

These views were enunciated by Mr. Jebb in his Colonial Nationalism, 
published in 1905. As an interpretation they made a deep impression on 
Australian thought, and did much to stimulate the national self-consciousness 
they predicated. As a forecast, however, they were accepted with some 
scepticism and not welcomed or acknowledged as an ideal. Yet in pro- 
portion as the " national " activities enter into the self-government of a 
Dominion, as its interests and policy come into contact with those of other 
countries, the question of responsibility forces itself into consideration. If 
the determination of policy and responsibility for action be with the Dominion 
Mr. Jebb's conclusions as to disintegration seem inevitable, whatever one 



580 Federal Handbook. 



may think of the prospect of alliance. If, on the other hand, the British 
Government is to remain responsible, that Government must have the final 
determination, and with the increased activity of the Dominion Government 
in what used to be the Imperial sphere, the occasions for an active partici- 
pation by Great Britain in the policy of the Dominions must increase. It 
requires no great amount of prescience to see that such a system would not 
work — it would be as little consistent with the traditions of Great Britain as 
with those of the Dominions. There is a third possibility. We may develop 
some organ, neither the British Government nor the Dominion Government, 
but composed of both, for deliberating, determining, and acting in the name 
of all, combining responsibility with power. As yet the periodical " Con- 
ference " with its permanent secretariat, and subsidiary conferences, is all 
that is firmly established. The Committee of Imperial Defence, used in con- 
junction with the Conference of 1911 and the conversations with the Canadian 
Ministers in 1912, is apparently offered tentatively as a means for more 
continuous consultation, but has evoked criticism as being essentially an 
adjunct of the British Government. It is probably true, as Lord MUner has 
observed, that any great step forward will demand some formal and conscious 
act of constitution-making. That is possible only if backed by a public 
opinion throughout the Empire sufl&cient to carry constructive statesmanship 
over the many obstacles which bar the path. Such an opinion does not 
yet exist. But Australians are now at any rate conscious that there is an 
Imperial problem to be solved, and in their maturer political growth are 
less disposed than in their youth to a sensitive repugnance to all discussion 
of the matter as disloyal to the ideal of self-government. 



Australia, Its People and Their Activities. 



581 



CHAPTER XIV. 

MISCELLANEOUS NOTES ON AUSTRALIA, ITS PEOPLE AND 
THEIR ACTIVITIES. 

By G. H. Kvihhs, C.M.G., F.S.S., F.R.A.S., etc., Commonwealth 

Statistician. 

SYNOPSIS. 

1. The People of Australia. 

(a) Race, Physique, and Health. 
(6) Longevity of Australians. 

2. The Trade and Finance of Australia — 

(a) Oversea Trade. 
(6) Public Debt. 

(c) Accumulation. 

(d) Financial Relationship Between Commonwealth and States. 

3. Productive Industries. 

4. Land Legislation and Settlement. 

5. Immigration. 

6. Postal Services. 

". Scientific Socikties and Liberal Educational Effort. 
8. Educational Benefactions: 

I. The People of Australia. 

(a) Race, Physique, and Health. 

Australia is a country slightly larger than the United States of America, 
and nearly the same size as Europe, including Russia in Europe, the 
area, population, and density of population of the countries mentioned 
being as follows : — 



Particulars. 


Europe. 


United States. 


Australia. 


Area in square miles. . 

Population . . 

Density (persons per sq. mile) 


3,860,368 

452,153,642 

117-13 


2,973,890 

91,972,266 

30-93 


2,974,581 

4,668,707 

1-57 



The control of so large a territory by a mere handful of people 
naturally offers difl&culties of a unique character, one of which deserves 
special mention, viz., that arising from the adoption of what is known 
as the " White Australia " policy, by which it is hoped to avoid 
difficulties that have arisen in some other parts of the world, where 
heterogeneous, or apparently heterogeneous, populations are associated 
in civic life. 

Australia embraces 1,825,261 square miles south of the Tropic of Capri- 
corn, and 1,149,-320 square miles within the tropics, and although the high- 
lands of the north will enable a limited but considerable number to live 
in what is really a non-tropical region within that tropic, the problem of 
peopling the north is that of establishing, in tropical regions, a white race. 
Experiments are being made at the present time to develop the northern 
portions of Australia, and valuable scientific investigations in tropical 
medicine, which may be helpful in this effort, are being made at the Institute 
of Tropical Medicine in Townsville. There is little doubt that these will 
throw some light upon the subject, and assist materially in bringing the 
problem to a satisfactory solution, if that be possible. 



582 



Federal Handbook. 



In regard to the range of climate of the principal towns, it may be 
mentioned that meteorological researches shew that the mean annual tem- 
perature at Darwin is 82*7° Fahr., while at Ballarat it is only 53*2° Fahr., 
while the mean annual rainfall ranges from 61 '7 inches at Darwin to 9 '3 
at Kalgoorlie. 

The Australian people, with regard to racial constitution, are virtually 
British, as the following figures from the last census shew, and it may be 
added that the descendants of other European races disclose but small 
difierentiation from their fellow citizens of British origin. The percentages 
of the principal races represented are as follows : — 

Australian born, 82 "90 per cent. ; natives of United Kingdom, 13 '37 ; 
of New Zealand, '72 ; of Germany, "75 ; of China, '47 ; of Scandinavia 
"33 ; of all other places, 1 "46 ; that is to say, at the date of the census, 
1911, no less than 97 per cent, had been born either in Australasia or in the 
United Kingdom. 

The evolution of the Australian people, therefore, may be regarded as 
that of the British people under changed climatic, social, and economic 
conditions. 

With regard to the physical proportions of the Australian people, a 
considerable number of measurements has been made in all the 
States in connection with the military system of Australia, and from 
these measurements the following table has been deduced : — 



Age. 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


Height . . ins. 


55-3 


56-2 


59.2 


61-5 


63-7 


65-2 


66-4 


Weight . . lbs. 


72-2 


79-6 


87.2 


98-5 


110-9 


118-9 


128-2 


Weight divided by 
















height (lbs. -^ in.) 


1-31 


1-39 


1-48 


1-60 


1-74 


1-83 


1-93 


Ponderal index 


22-8 


22-7 


22-7 


22-7 


22-8 


22-8 


22-9 



In tho above table the ponderal index is given. This index represents 
the ratio of the cube root of the weight divided by the height, and multiplied 
by some constant. When the weight (W) is expressed in grammes, and the 
height (H) in centimetres, one sees that the result WVH is equivalent to the 
ratio of the side of a cube of water the same weight as the person to his 
actual height, and is thus a ratio, large for heavily built, and small for lightly 
built individuals, but independent of their actual weight. The ratio usually 
adopted is 100 times the above, and on the average is about 29 at birth, 
falls to 22| at about eleven years of age, and rises to 24 or 25 in old age. 
Measurements of 959 Oxford University students between the ages 18 to 23 
gave about 23 -25 as the average. The average Australian male of the same 
age has a ponderal index of about 22 -9. and this number was deduced from 
over 120,000 youths. It is obvious that the Australian is fairly well set up. 

Equally remarkable with the great variety, already referred to, of the 
Australian climate, is its salubrity. 

In regard to the death rates in various parts of the world. New Zealand 
occupies the premier place with an annual death rate of only 8 -9 per 1,000 



Australia, Its People and Their Activities. 



583 



(1912), and next to it comes the Australian Commonwealtli. For the quin- 
quennium 1906-10 and the two years 1911-12 the death rate per 1000 was 
10 "75 and 10 '35 respectively. There has been a fairly steady decrease for the 
last thirty years, the death rate being 15*63 for the quinquennium 1881-5. 
This decrease of over 30 per cent, in so short a time is very remarkable. 
The similar rates for 1911 for other countries are: — Canada 12*6, Norway 
13 -2, Denmark 13 -6, Sweden 13 '8, Netherlands 14 -5, United Kingdom 14 -8, 
the German Empire 17 -3, France 19 -6, Italy 21 -4, and European Russia 
31 •!, this last, however, being for 1905. 

The table hereunder of rates per 1000 of the population for deaths from 
various causes reveals certain striking features to which attention may be 
drawn. In the period covered by the table, infantile mortality has fallen 
from 126 per 1000 to about 70, a little over one-half. Typhoid, which was 
0*55 per 1000 in the quinquennium 1881-5, is now only 0'12, diphtheria 
and croup, which were 0*51 in 1886-90, are now only 0*16, and pulmonary 
tuberculosis has decreased from 1*31 to 0*66, say, to one-half. Cancer, on 
the other hand, has about doubled, having increased from '36 to "75. This 
diminution in the frequency of death from tuberculosis and increase in that 
from cancer is however general. 







Death-rates 


FROM Various Causes. 








General 


Infantile 


Typhoid 




Scarlet 


Diphtheria 


Pulmonary 


Cancer 

per 
100,000. 


Period. 


Death 

Rate per 

1,000. 


Mortality 

per 

1,000. 


Fever 

per 

100,000. 


per 
100,000. 


Fever 

per 

100,000. 


and Croup 

per 

100,000. 


Tuberculosis 

per 

100,000. 


1881-1885 


15-69 


126 


55 


8 


7 


43 


131 


36 


1886-1890 


14-85 


120 


52 


3 


5 


51 


121 


42 


1891-1895 


13-32 


108 


25 


10 


4 


35 


107 


50 


1896-1900 


12-75 


112 


34 


11 


4 


16 


95 


58 


1901-1905 


11-76 


97 


22 


4 


2 


10 


89 


63 


1906-1910 


10-75 


78 


16 


2 


1 


10 


75 


70 


1911&1912 


10-95 


70 


12 


8 


1 


16 


66 


75 



These favorable facts are reflected in the average length of life of the 
Australian people, as is disclosed in several tables hereafter, the whole 
evidence shewing that, if we except New Zealand, the position of Australia 
is unique with respect to its healthiness. 

(b) Longevity of Australians. 

During the last quarter of a century, Australia, together with almost 
every other country, has given indications of a decided increase in the 
longevity of its people. Contrary to popular opinion, it appears probable 
that native-born Australians of European stock will attain ages at least 
equal to those attained by their immigrant forbears. Such indications 
are furnished (a) by the diminishing crude death rates experienced, (6) by 
the increasing numbers of old persons recorded at successive censuses, and 
(c) still more satisfactorily by the increase in the expectation of life deduced 
from the mortality experience of the population for successive decades. 
Whilst (a) and (6) are indications which may easily be misleading, (c) is 
practically unexceptionable, taken in conjunction with the increasing pro- 
portion of Australian born in the population of Australia. 



584 



Federal Handbook. 



Life tables for the several States and for the Commonwealth of Australia 
as a whole weie prepared in connection with the Australian census of 1911. 
These tables fui'nish results for each sex and for each of the three decennial 
periods 1881-90, 1891-1900, and 1901-10. It may be mentioned that this 
is the first occasion on which a comprehensive investigation of the mortality 
experience of the Australian States has been undertaken. 

For the Commonwealth as a whole the following table furnishes the 
numbers surviving at successive vicennial ages out of 1000 at birth according 
to the six Commonwealth tables : — 

Of 1,000 Males OR 1,000 Females Born, Numbers Surviving to Different 
Ages, according to Australian Mortality Experience, 1881-90, 
1891-1900, 1901-10. 



Age. 


Males. 


Females. 


1881-1890. 


1891-1900. 


1901-1910. 


1881-1890. 


1891-1900. 


1901-1910. 


.. 


1,000 


1,000 


1,000 


1,000 


1,000 


1,000 


20 . . 


766 


803 


845 


791 


825 


865 


40 . . 


641 


698 


759 


675 


725 


780 


60 . . 


435 


502 


568 


500 


566 


632 


80 . . 


104 


126 


143 


157 


186 


214 



These figures indicate that, according to the latest Australian experience, 
56f per cent, of all males born will reach age 60, and 63j per cent, of aU 
females, while no fewer than 14J per cent, of all males and 21J per 
cent, of all females born will reach 80. At the present time the result is 
probably still more favorable. These results are an interesting evidence 
of the increasing numbers of survivors according to the successive experi- 
ences. For instance, while, according to the 1881-90 experience, 43J per 
cent, of all males and 50 per cent, of all females born would reach age 60, 
according to that for 1901-10, these proportions are, as mentioned above, 
increased to 56| per cent, for males and 63j per cent, for females. 

A different view of this improvement in rates of mortality is given in 
the table hereunder, which furnishes for various ages the average annual 
Australian rates of mortality per 10,000 for the three decennia 1881-90, 
1891-1900, and 1901-10 :— 

Annual Eates of Mortality per 10,000 in Australia 1881-90, 1891-1900, 

AND 1901-10. 







Males. 






Females. 




Age. 




























1881-1890. 


1891-1900. 


1901-1910. 


1881-1890. 


1891-1900. 


1901-1910. 


.. 


1,325 


1,184 


951 


1,157 


1,014 


795 


10 . . 


25 


23 


18 


24 


20 


16 


20 . . 


71 


47 


37 


53 


39 


33 


40 . . 


113 


97 


82 


104 


84 


72 


60 . . 


323 


303 


258 


240 


225 


192 


80 . . 


1,365 


1,384 


1,380 


1,245 


1,224 


1,133 



Australia, Its People and Their Activities. 



585 



Up to age 60 there is quite a remarkable diminution in the rate of 
mortality in each sex. This, indeed, holds up to 70, but from that age 
onwards the rates are in some cases slightly higher in the later than in the 
earlier decennia. This is, of course, a consequence of the fact that if deaths 
are postponed by diminishing the number dying early, they will tend to 
swell those at higher ages, and under ordinary circumstances must increase 
the rates at such higher ages. 

A representation of the position, which from some points of view is more 
satisfactory than either of the foregoing is that which exhibits for various 
ages what is known as the " expectation of life," i.e., the mean duration of 
life beyond a given age of those who attain that age. 

The following table furnishes for various ages the results deduced from the 
Australian experience for each sex for each of the three decennia under review : — 

Australian Expectation of Life, 1881-90, 1891-1900, and 1901-10. 





Hales. 


Females. 


Age. 
















1881-1890. 


1891-1900. 


1901-1910. 


1881-1890. 


1891-1900. 


1901-1910. 




Years. 


Years. 


Years. 


Years. 


Years. 


Years. 





47-2 


51 1 


55-2 


50-8 


54-8 


58-8 


10 . . 


48-9 


51-4 


53-5 


51-9 


54-5 


56-4 


20 . . 


40-6 


42-8 


44-7 


43-4 


45-7 


47-5 


40 . . 


26-5 


27-6 


28-6 


29- 1 


30-5 


31-4 


60 . . 


13-8 


140 


14-3 


15-4 


15-9 


16-2 


80 . . 


51 


50 


50 


5-3 


5-5 


5-7 



These results shew that for the whole of life there has been an increase 
of no less than eight years both for males and females in the expectation 
of life when the experience for 1901-10 is compared with that for 1881-90. 
Similarly there has been an increase of about four and a half years in the 
expectation for each sex at age 10 and an increase of slightly more than four 
years in the expectation for each sex at age 20. 

The only country for which similar details are immediately available for 
the decennium 1901-10 is Sweden, the figures for which country, in com- 
parison with those for Australia, are given in the following table : — 

Comparison of Australian Life Table 1901-10 with that for Sweden, 

1901-10. 





Number Surviving. 


Rate of Mortality, Per 
1,000. 


Expectation of Life. 


Age. 












Australia, 


Sweden, 


Australia. Sweden, 


Australia, 


Sweden, 




1901-10. 


1901-10. 


1901-10. 1901-10. 


1901-10. 


1901-10. 






^^ 


i 
ALES. 









1,000 


1,000 


95- 1 


92-6 


55-2 


54-6 


20 


845 


817 


3-7 


6-4 


44-7 


45-9 


40 . . 


759 


719 


8-2 


7-6 


28-6 


30-8 


60 .. 


568 


566 


25-8 


20-7 


14-4 


101 


80 . . 


143 


194 


138 


120-8 


50 


5-2 




Females. 






.. 


1,000 


1,000 


79-5 


75-9 


58-8 


57-0 


20 .. 


8G5 


831 


3 3 


5-3 


47-5 


47-7 


40 . . 


780 


735 


7-2 


70 


31-5 


32-5 


60 . . 


632 


604 


19-2 


16-6 


16-2 


17-2 


80 . . 


214 


237 


113-3 


109-4 


5-7 


5-6 



586 



Federal Handbook. 



The following table furnishes a comparison of the Australian expectation 
of life for successive vicennial ages for the decennium 1891-1900, with 
similar information relating to a corresponding period for the principal 
European countries for which such information is available : — 



Comparative Table of 


Expectation of Life, Y 


EARS 


1891 


-19O0 


. 


Age in Years. 


.d 

|V 
^2 


6 
o 

■§1 


Norway. 
1891-1900. 


Denmark, 
1895-1900. 

Netherlands, 
1890-1899. 


S2 


Belgium. 
1891-1900. 

England and 

Wales, 

1891-1900. 


c> 


Italy, 
1899-1902. 


II 


"So 
So 










, 















Maies. 





20 
40 
60 
80 





20 
40 
60 
80 





Years. 


Years. 


Years. 


Years. 


Years. 


Years. 


Y'ears. 


Years. 


Years. 


Years. 


Years. 




52-2 


50-9 


50-4 


50-2 


46-2 


45-7 


45-4 


44-1 


42-9 


42-8 


40-6 




44-7 


44-7 


43-6 


44-5 


43-4 


41-5 


41-8 


41-0 


42-0 


43-1 


41-2 




28-6 


29-9 


30-6 


28-9 


28-1 


27-1 


26-7 


25-6 


27-3 


28-0 


25-9 




14-3 


15-4 


16-4 


14-7 


14-0 


13-8 


13-4 


12-9 


13-5 


13-6 


12-8 




5-0 


4-9 


5-6 


4-9 


4-7 


4-9 


4-6 


4-6 


4-3 


4-3 


4-2 



Females. 



54-8 
45-7 
30-5 
15-9 
5-5 



53-6 
46-8 
51-7 
16-6 
5-4 



54-1 
46-5 
32-3 
17-5 
61 



53-2 
46-7 
31-2 
16-0 
5-3 



49-0 
44-8 
29-7 
150 
5-0 



49-1 
44-0 
29-6 
15-1 
5-4 



48-8 
44-4 
29-5 
14-8 
4-9 



47-8 


45-6 


43-2 


44-0 


43-4 


44-2 


43-2 


43-4 


27-8 


29-5 


28-7 


28-1 


14-1 


14-6 


13-7 


13-6 


50 


4-9 


4-2 


4-5 



Years 
37-8 
40-1 
25-5 
12-6 
4-4 



39-9 
40-8 
26-6 
12-8 
4-5 



Comparing the Australian rates of mortality with those of Sweden for 
the decennium 1901-10 it will be seen that the incidence is markedly diSerent 
in the two countries. The eSect of this upon the economic aspect of the 
population of the two communities will best be seen by analysing the re- 
spective expectations of life so as to shew, in regard to each person born, 
the average time lived in the three groups of " Dependent Age " (under 15), 
" Supporting Age " (15 to 65), and " Old Age " (above 65). 

Treated in this manner the life tables furnish the following results : — 

Analysis op Australian and Swedish Expectations of Life, 1901-10 





Age. 


Average Time Lived in Period by Each 
Person Born. 


Period. 


Males. ; 


Females. 




Australia, Sweden, 

1901-10, 1901-10, 

Experience | Experience. 


Australia, Sweden, 

1901-10, 1901-10, 

Experience. Experience. 


Dependent Age . . 
Supporting Age . . 
Old Age 


-15 

15-64 
65- 


Years. 

13-14 

36-56 

5-50 


Years. 

12-94 

35-20 

6-41 


Years. 
13-40 
38-19 

7-25 


Years. 

13-20 

36-30 

7-50 


The whole of life 


55-20 


54-55 


58-84 1 5700 



This table indicates that for the economically important period of life, 
viz., from 15 to 65, each male born in Australia experiences on the average 
1 '36 years of Kfe more than a male born in Sweden, and each female born 
in Australia 1 -89 years of life on the average more than a female born in 
Sweden. This is a matter of considerable importance when it is remembered 
that the mortality experience of Sweden is practically the best in Europe. 



Australia, Its People and Their Activities. 



587 



2. The Trade and Finance of Australia. 

The subject of the oversea trade of Australia has been treated at some 
length in Chap. XI., section 4. What is added here is supplementary to 
that article. The facts which go to shew that there has been corresponding 
expansion of the internal trade are derivable from railway statistics and 
have been already set out at some length in the chapter mentioned, section 7. 

(a) Oversea Trade. 

Although far removed from the great centres of population, the Com- 
monwealth of Australia occupies a relatively high position amongst the 
trading countries of the world. To illustrate this, various tables have been 
compiled, and are given hereinafter. These review the situation for the 
past thirty years. In these tables the results are shewn either for quin- 
quennial groups, or at quinquennial intervals. Tables so built up have 
two advantages over others with only annual intervals. In the first place 
a much larger period can be brought within the limits of a single table ; 
and in the second place accidental fluctuations from year to year, due to 
non-recurring causes, are either eliminated or greatly reduced. In the 
period under review there were three of these fluctuations, to which refer- 
ence will be made in the proper place. 

The volume of a country's external trade, and its amount per head, is 
a very fair index of its prosperity, provided that due allowance be made for 
the important factors that may influence it. The first table shews the over- 
sea trade of the Australian Commonwealth under the three headings of 
" Recorded Value," " Value per Inhabitant per annum," and " Percentage 
of Imports upon Exports " : — 

Oversea Trade of the Commonwealth, 1881-1912. 



Quinquennial 




Recorded Value. 


Value Per Inhabitant Per 
Annum. 


Percentage 

of 

Exports 

Upon 

Exports. 




Imports. 


Exports. 


Total 
Trade. 


Imports. 


Exports. 


Total 
Trade. 


1881-1885 
1886-1890 
1891-1895 
1896-1900 
1901-1905 
1906-1910 
Year 1912 




£.1000 

174,474 
173,377 
136,675 
168,815 
196,289 
257,539 
78,159 


£1,000 

140,274 
132,895 
168,413 
205,468 
250,188 
346,683 
79,096 


£1,000 

314,748 
306,272 
305,088 
374,283 
452,477 
604,222 
157,255 


£ «. (I. 

14 5 3 

11 16 7 

8 4 

9 5 5 
10 1 8 

12 5 7 
16 16 7 


£ «. d. 

11 9 3 
9 14 

10 2 

11 5 9 
13 3 2 

16 10 8 

17 7 


£ s. d. 

25 14 6 
20 17 11 
18 6 
20 11 2 
23 4 10 
28 16 3 
33 17 2 


80-4 
76-6 
123' 2 
121-7 
130-5 
134-6 
101-2 



It will be derived from this table that the value of trade per head per 
annum started at £25 14s. 6d. in the first quinquennium, fell rapidly for ten 
years, and then recovered itself, at first slowly and afterwards more rapidly. 
The first quinquennium, and part of the second, formed a period of large 
public borrowing and trade activity, but this was followed by a period of 
stress, culminating in the acute financial crisis of 1892, when several of the 
banks suspended payment. Recovery began to be apparent in 1896 and 
continued steadily until 1903-4, when there was a somewhat severe set-back 
owing to the drought of 1902. Since then, however, the advance has been 
almost continuous, the only check being in the years 1908-9, when, as a 
consequence of the American financial crisis of 1907, there was a fall in the 
prices of Australian staple products. 



588 



Federal Handbook. 



The tliird column of the table shews the relation between imports and 
exports for the period. For the first ten years the balance of trade was in 
favour of imports — the consequence of large public borrowing in that 
period. From that time until 1911, the balance was in favour of exports, 
the normal situation for a debtor country which is not largely increasing 
its public debt. In 1912, however, there was heavy public borrowing, and 
the imports were so largely increased in consequence, that imports and 
exports for that year practically balanced each other. 

(b) Public Debt. 

Reference has been made in the previous paragraph to Australia as a 
debtor country, and mention may now be made of the aggregate public 
debt of the various States. The table hereunder shews the increase since 
1881 at quinquennial intervals, and the increase per head of population, 
and both will be be seen to be extremely large — 





Public 


Debt of Australian States. 




Year. 


Amount. 


Per Head. 


Year. 


Amount. 


Per Head. 


1881 
1886 
1891 
1896 


£ 

66,306,471 

117,323,018 

15.5,117,773 

180,623,886 


£ s. d. 
29 4 6 
42 15 10 
48 10 8 
51 5 7 


1901 
1906 
1913 


£ 

203,518,275 

238,427,820 

*294,482,164 


£ s. d. 
53 14 6 
58 14 9 
61 6 1 



* Exclusive of Commonwealth Debt, £7,430,948. 

This has been the occasion from time to time of much extraordinary and 
irrelevant criticism by persons who failed to recognize that the loan money 
has been applied largely to the improvement of internal communication 
(absolutely essential to the development of a country which has no large 
and navigable waterways), to harbor works, water supply, or other great 
public utilities. The Australian States thus possess solid assets which 
practically counterbalance the debt, inasmuch as they nearly pay the 
interest bill. That this is a fair statement of the case can be illustrated as 
follows : — In the financial year ended 30th June, 1912, the States obtained 
in revenue from their " Public Works and Services " the sum of £23,690,269. 
The expenditure during the same period was £15,952,803, leaving a surplus 
of £7,737, 466. The interest payments for the year amounted to £9,479,003. 
The profit on the " Public Works and Services " is thus sufficient to meet 
all the interest payments, except an amount of £1,741,537. This, if capi- 
talized at the average rate of interest paid by the States, amounts to about 
£50,000,000, which is thus the amount of the public debt which was not 
directly reproductive at that time.* Even this, however, is spent on immi- 
gration, or in other ways which indirectly increases the wealth of Australia. 
The country is thus not saddUng itself with a mere dead weight, but is rather 
in the position of a company which for business principles is constantly 
enlarging its capital, and is in a very different position financially from a 
country whose public debt has been incurred in, say, war. 

• The Public Debt at 30th June, 1912, was £277,124,095. 



Australia, Its People and Their Activities. 



589 



(c) Accumulation. 

Under this heading will be included deposits in ordinary banks, deposits 
in savings banks, etc., for the period under review. 

The following table (Accumulation i.) shews the amount of deposits in the 
ordinary banks for five-yearly intervals. The amounts given do not, of 
course, represent the savings of the people, but rather the foundation for the 
volume of trade. The fluctuations to be observed in the case of a former 
table (Oversea Trade) are reproduced here in an even more marked degree : — 

Accumulation (i.) Deposits in Ordinary Banks. 



Year, 30th June. 



Amount £1,000,000 
Per Head 



£ I £ 

50-932 I 75-468 

£. g. d. \ £ s. d. 

22 8 11 I 27 10 7 



£ 

97-692 

£ s. d. 

30 11 3 



£ 

85-680 

£ s. d. 

24 6 6 



£ 

91-487 

£ s. d. 

24 2 8 



£ 
106-515 
£ s. d. 
26 1 6 



£ 
149-828 
£ s. d. 
31 4 



A second table (Accumulation ii.) furnishes the number of depositors in 
savings banks during the period and the amount at credit. These show 
steady advances during the 30 years, uninfluenced by any fluctuation. 

Accumulation (ii.). — Savings Banks Statistics. 



Year. 


Number of 


Amount at 


Amount Per Head 


Depositors. 


Credit. 


of Population. 


1881 


250,070 


7,893,464 


3 9 7 


1886 






396,735 


10,284,530 


3 15 


1891 






614,741 


15,536.592 


4 17 3 


1896 






764,650 


24,330,214 


6 18 2 


1901 






964,553 


30,882,465 


8 3 


1906 






1,185,608 


38,286,219 


9 9 10 


1911 




1,600,112 


59,393,682 


13 8 5 


1913* 




1,961,215 


75,462,850 


15 14 4 



* Includes Commonwealth Savings Bank. 

A third table (Accumulation iii.) shews the amounts paid in insurance 
premiums (ordinary business). The figures from 1881-1906 include the 
foreign business of Australian companies, but exclude the Australian business 
of foreign companies : — 

Accumulation (hi.). — Premium Income (New and Renewal) of 
Australian Companies.* 



Year. 



1881. 



1886. 



1896. 



1901. 



1906. 



£ 
Amount . . . . I 887,894 

Amount per head of i £ s. d. 
population . . i 7 10 



£ 

1,406,854 

£ «. d. 

10 3 



£ 

2,144,695 

£ 8. d. 

13 5 



£ 

2,328,325 

£ «. d. 

13 3 



£ , £ 

2,917,552 , 3,619,918 

£ s. d. \ £ s. d. 

15 5 17 10 



£ 

4,938,315 

£ s. d. 

113 



* Including (till 1906) foreign business of Australian companies, but excluding Australian business of 

foreign companies. 

The two tables taken together shew that, despite the charges of private 
extravagance, not unfrequently levelled against Australians, large and 
increasing sums are put by for purely provident pui-poses. This, moreover, 
is exclusive of the money invested in building societies, etc. It is just 
possible that persons whose experience is mainly of the old world are apt 
to mistake the higher standard of living for improvidence. 



590 Federal Handbook. 



(d) Financial Relationship between Commonwealth and States. 

A few words may be added on the changes in public finance brought about 
by Federation. At the time of Federation the main revenue of the States 
was derived from taxation (direct and indirect), and income from " Public 
Works and Services." For the first ten years after Federation, the financial 
relations between Commonwealth and State Governments were regulated 
by Section 87 of the Constitution, known generally as the " Braddon 
Clause." This provided that the Commonwealth should, until 31st Decem- 
ber; 1910, and thereafter, as long as Parliament should decide, retain for its 
own use an amount not exceeding one-fourth of the net revenue from customs 
and excise duties, the balance to be returned to the States. The original 
framers of the Constitution only contemplated a moderate Federal expendi- 
dure, and doubtless considered one-fourth of the customs and excise revenue 
sufficient, as it certainly was at first. After six or seven years, however, it 
began to be realized that the Federal Government, with its heavy self-imposed 
commitments for large national purposes, such as defence, old-age pensions, etc., 
must face a largely increased expenditure. Consequently, on the expiration 
of the Braddon clause, a new arrangement was made, for a period of ten 
years, on terms much more favorable to the Commonwealth Government. 
By the terms of the new agreement, the Commonwealth retains the whole 
of the customs and excise revenue, and makes to each State, by monthly 
instalments, an annual subsidy equal to 2-53. per head of the population 
of that State, as at 31st December of the financial year in question. Special 
annual subsidies are being made, in addition, to Western Australia and 
Tasmania, as compensation for the dislocation of their fijiances, which 
occurred when they surrendered control of their customs and excise revenue 
to the Commonwealth. These arrangements are subject to alteration, or may 
be determined at the expiration of ten years (1920). 

3. Productive Industries. 
(a) Value of Production. 

The productive industries of Australia may be classified under the 
headings of agricultural, pastoral, dairjdng, etc., forestry and fisheries, mining 
and manufacturing. From the point of view of value of production, 
manufacturing has taken the lead for the past two years — a position 
previously held by the pastoral industry. At present agriculture fills the 
third place, mining, dairy and poultry farming, and forestry and fisheries 
following in the order named. 

The development of these various industries having already been fully 
described in previous chapters of this book, this further reference to 
them must be considered as merely supplementary, and as dealing with them 
purely from a statistical point of view. 

The inaccuracy of statistical information, and the absence of uniformity 
of its collection by the several States prior to 1906, and in the case of manu- 
facturing for three years later, render it extremely difficult to form an 
estimate of the probable value of production during the earlier years. Careful 
estimates have, however, been made, and may be accepted as being suffi- 
ciently connect to form a basis for comparative purposes, and also to furnish 
evidence of the development that has taken place in the several industries 
during recent years. 



Australia, Its People and Their Activities. 



591 



Estimated Value op Production from Australian Industries. 



Year. 


^S' j I'-*--!- 


Dairy, 
Poultry, 
and Bee 
Farming. 


Forestry 

and 
Fisheries. 


Mining. 


Manufac- 
turing. 


Total. 


1901 
1906 
1912 


£ £ 
1,000 1,000 

23,835 27,150 
25,349 45,389 
45,754 ' 51,615 


£ 
1,000 

9,740 
13,611 

20,280 


£ 
1,000 

2,772 
4,879 
6,432 


£ 
1,000 

22,016 
26,622 
25,629 


£ 
1,000 

27,191 
33,205 
57,022 


£ 
1,000 

112,704 
149,055 
206,732 



Per Head of Mean Poptjl\tton. 





£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


1901 


6-29 


7-16 


2-57 


0-73 


5-81 


717 


29-73 


1906 


6-24 


1118 


3-35 


1 20 


6 -.56 


818 


36-71 


1912 


9-85 


1111 


4-37 


1 38 


5-52 


12-28 


44-51 



(b) Agriculture. 

Prior to the gold discoveries, and the consequent large influx of popu- 
lation, very little attention was paid in Australia to agriculture, the bulk of 
the food-stuffs being imported. It is estimated that only 491,000 acres were 
under cultivation in 1850. The growing demand for agricultural products, 
however, was soon reflected in the increased area cultivated, and from that 
date, irrespective of fluctuations incidental to climatic conditions in 
certain seasons, a consistent and satisfactory development has been in 
evidence. 

From 1871 to 1912 the area under crop increased from 2,316,000 acres 
to 13,038,000 acres, or by 456 per cent., while the total value of produce 
increased from £8,941,000 to £45,754,000, or by 412 per cent. 

(c) The Pastoral Industry. 

The pastoral industry is far the most important of the primary pro- 
ductive industries of the Commonwealth, and in 1912 represented £51,615,000, 
or nearly 34 per cent, of the total value of those industries. Wool, 
of course, is the main factor in this yield, the values of wool and sheep- 
skins exported during 1901, 1906, and 1912 being £15,237,000, £22,646,000, 
and £26,355,000 respectively. The recent revision of the tariff of the 
United States of America will probably have the effect of opening up a 
very large market for Australian mutton and other meat products, in 
addition to largely increasing the demand for our wool. 

(d) Dairy, Poultry, and Bee Farming. 

The development of the dairying industry in Australia has been rapid 
during the last few years. The exports of butter, which in 1901 were valued 
at £1,451,000, rose to £3,240,000 in 1906 ; five years later, in 1911, they 
represented no less a value than £4,637,000, having more than trebled 
during the decade. 

The total value of output of dairy, poultry, and bee farming in 1906 
was £13,611,000 ; in 1908, £15,045,000 ; in 1910, £17,387,000 ; and in 1912, 
£20,280,000. 

C. 12154. 2i' 



592 



Federal Handbook. 



(e) Forestry and Fisheries. 

(i.) Forestry. — The forests of the Commonwealth cover about 102,000,000 
acres, the area specially reserved being about 27f million acres. The use» of 
the more important of Australian timbers are many and various, and for 
durability and beauty are unsurpassed by any timbers in the world. The 
quantity of local timber sawn or hewn in Australia during 1902 was 352 
million superficial feet, five years after it was over 416 million, while in 
1912 over 667i million superficial feet of Australian timber was sawn or 
hewn throughout the Commonwealth. 

A considerable quantity of wattle and other bark used for tanning pur- 
poses is produced. During 1912 the local tanneries used 26,739 tons, while 
8,402 tons were exported. 

(ii.) Fisheries. — Valuable food fishes abound in the coastal waters of 
Australia, while the fresh water rivers and lakes yield abundant supplies 
both of natural and acclimatized species. Pearls and pearlshell are obtained 
in Western Australia, Queensland, and the Northern Territory, the last two 
places also exporting quantities of beche-de-mer and tortoiseshell. 

The enhanced value of the combined production of forestry and fisheries 
during the past few years has been very satisfactory, the value of output 
having increased from £4,879,000, in 1906, to £6,432,000, in 1912. 

(f) Mining. 

Although the annual return from mining is now considerably less than 
that yielded by the pastoral, agricultural, and manufacturing industries, 
nevertheless, the value of mineral production during 1912 amounted to 
£25,629,238, an amount that had only been exceeded by the 1906 output, 
the total value of which was £26,621,796. To the end of 1912 the Com- 
monwealth mineral production totalled over 810 million pounds, to which gold 
contributed £546,080,000 ; silver and lead, £70,069,000 ; copper, £62,394,000 ; 
tin, £31,577,000 ; and coal, £78,570,000. 

The following table shows the value of mineral production during certain 
years from 1851 to 1912 : — ■ 





Australian Mineral Production, 


1851-1912. 










Silver 












Y 


ear. 


Gold. 


and 
Lead. 


Copper. 


Tin. 


Coal. 


other. 


Total. 






£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


£ 


1851 




1,319,932 


1,778 


309,324 


11,937 


25,739 


2,190 


1.670,900 


1853 




12,757,564 


1,787 


176,355 


11.937 


78,252 


2,265 


13,028,160 


1860 




10,373,280 


11,926 


4,3,044 


11,937 


235,930 


3,000 


11,079,117 


1880 




4,906,903 


46,496 


667,545 


841,128 


644,801 


43,520 


7,150,393 


1890 




5,261,217 


2,857,849 


339,978 


646,157 


1,470.267 


268,611 


10,844,079 


1900 




13,578,438 


3,044,524 


1,802,215 


550,256 


2,019,303 


395,239 


21,389,975 


1910 




11,553,840 


2,224,687 


2,389,412 


950,768 


3,684,041 


*2,412,443 


23,215,191 


1912 




9,879,928 


3,876,251 


3,244,550 


1,348,992 


4,418,025 


»2,861,492 


25,629,238 



• Including zinc, 1910, £1,289,781 and £1,766,459. 

Since the year 1900 the value of the mineral output has not progressed 
very rapidly, the chief cause being the steady decline in the gold yield. The 
other important minerals, however, shew a substantial increase in pro- 
duction. 



Australia, Its People and Their Activities. 593 

(g) Manufacturing. 

Statistics relative to tlie manufacturing industries are not available for 
the Commonwealth as a whole prior to 1903. and are even then not complete. 
The growth of these industries since that date has been very considerable. 
The number of factories in 1903 was 11,551, as compared with 14,878 in 
1912, while the number of hands employed has increased from 195,810 
to 327,456 in the same period. Similarly the total amount of salaries and 
wages paid has risen from about £14,000,000, in 1903, to £31,287,492, in 
1912. The total value added in the process of manufacture in 1907 was 
£38,063,153, as compared with £60,499,787 in 1912. 

As regards capital invested in manufacturing industries it hiay be noted 
that the approximate value of land and buildings in connection with factories 
increased from £23,056,000 in 1903 to £34,809,000 in 1912, while that of 
plant and machinery employed in factories increased from £20,653,000 in 
1903 to £34,461,000 in 1912, that is to say, the total fixed capital 
employed in these industries rose from £43,709,000 to £69,270,000 — an 
increase of 58^ per cent. 

4. Land Legislation and Settlement. 
In the early days of Australian colonization, land could be alienated 
only by grants and orders from the Crown, and the power of making these 
was vested solely in the Governor. In 1787, land was granted to liberated 
convicts only, but two years later the privilege was extended to free immi- 
grants or to marines serving in Australia and desirous of settling in the colony. 
Tenure under leasehold was not adopted till the year 1811, and in 1834 
leases were granted under a covenant to convert the same into grants on the 
fulfilment of certain conditions, often merely nominal. Before this, however, 
the principle of alienation of land by sale to free settlers had been introduced 
by Sir Thomas Brisbane, the first land sale taking place in Sydney in 1825. 

The system of grants was abolished in 1831 except for public or charitable 
purposes, and purchase at public auction was made practically the sole 
means of alienating Crown lands. In the same year the principle of selection 
was introduced into the land laws of Australia. 

A new element was embodied in the Imperial Act of 1842, namely, 
the provision that, subject to a primary charge for survey, half the proceeds 
of the land sales were to be used to defray the cost of immigration of 
persons to the colony in which the revenue accrued. 

Under another Act, viz., in 1847, a new classification of lands took place, 
and, while sales by auction were maintained, a system of leasehold was 
introduced, giving the lessee a right of purchase during the currency of the 
lease at an upset price of £1 per acre, or, on the expiration of the lease, a 
pre-emptive right at the same price over all or any part of the land. 

The land legislation of New South Wales remained practically unaltered 
from 1847 to 1861, and, as the several colonies received their own Constitutions, 
their land laws for the most part remained identical with those of the mother 
colony until such time as local conditions and requirements called for new 
legislation. The influence of New South "Wales was not felt to the same 
extent in South Australia and Western Australia, where other conditions 
prevailed and where land settlement was effected by land laws of a special 
and novel character. In the first chapter of this book reference has 
already been made to Wakefield's scheme of settlement in South Australia. 



594 Federal irANDBOOK. 



When the excitement of the gold rush had subsided and the interest in 
gold digging was declining, the number of people desiring to settle on the 
land so increased that the question of land settlement became of the first 
order of importance. As a consequence, greater encouragement was given 
to settlers by making the conditions of tenure more liberal, and legislation 
was enacted to facilitate the establishment of an agrarian population side 
by side with the pastoral tenants. Men with limited capital were enabled 
to take up land under conditions that ensured a reasonable chance of success 
and at the same time the Acts passed aimed at preventing land being made 
the subject of mere speculative selection without bond fide intention of 
settlement. 

In 1858, South Australia enacted an important piece of land legislation, 
viz., the " Real Property Act." This Act, originated by Sir Robert R. 
Torrens, and subsequently adopted by all the States and by New Zealand, 
has greatly facilitated all dealings in land by providing for such registration 
of title as not only simplifies the investigation of such title, but also secures 
the registered owner against all parties. 

Many and varied were the experiments in land legislation made by the 
several States. Acts from time to time were repealed, amended, or elaborated 
as new conditions emerged, or difficulties presented themselves. Even at 
the present time, though there is a considerable similarity between the 
principal form of tenure in the States, the terms and conditions vary very 
considerably. 

In all the States, what are known as Closer Settlement Acts have been 
passed. It was found that the value of the produce of a large estate, 
originally considered as being at its full capacity, compared unfavorably with 
the returns which could be obtained from the same area when subdivided 
and cultivated by settlers. 

Under the Acts mentioned, the State Governments resume, either under 
agreement or under compulsory purchase, large estates which have in past 
years been alienated by the Crown, and, after cutting them up into areas 
of suitable size, throw them open to settlement on easy terms and conditions. 
Of the total area of the Commonwealth, on the 31st December, 1912, 5"4 per 
cent, was alienated, 2-7 per cent, was in process of alienation, 45'1 per cent. 
was held under lease or licence, while the remainder, 46"8 per cent., was 
unoccupied. 

5. Immigration. 

While recognizing fully the desirability of increasing the population of 
their respective States by immigration, the State authorities, long prior to 
Federation, deemed it wise to impose certain restrictions upon the character 
of the immigration. The influx of Chinese, for example, was limited by 
stringent statutory provisions, and Acts were passed in most of the States 
restricting the immigration of other, chiefly Asiatic, races. 

Further restrictions were placed upon the admission of persons who were 
undesirable as inhabitants, either for medical or moral reasons, or who were 
likely to be an economic burden upon the community. On the Federation 
of the States in 1901, the power to make laws with respect to immigration 
passed into the hands of the Commonwealth G-overnment. 

At the present time, besides the restrictions mentioned above, an immi- 
grant may be required to pass a dictation test before being admitted into 



Australia, Its People and Their Activities. 595 

the Commonwealth. It may be stated that in general practice this test 
is not imposed upon persons of European race. 

Since the year 1861 the net immigration, that is, the excess of arrivals 
over departures, has been 959,515 ; while for the same period the natural 
increase, that is, the excess of births over deaths, has been 2,628,259. 

To shew, however, the present activity of the several States in the matter 
of immigration, it is necessary to give only the figures for the year 1912, 
during which the arrivals from overseas into the Commonwealth were 166,958. 

The departures in the same year amounted to 83,217, leaving a net immi- 
gration total of 83,742 — a number which easily constitutes a record. 

The net immigration for 1912 is also remarkable for the fact that it 
actuall}' exceeded the natural increase of the population, which was 80,911. 

In the earlier days of settlement in Australia, State-assisted immigration 
played an important part. 

Occasionally, however, one or other of the States would discontinue the 
practice, but of late years the policy has been revived and is now being 
vigorously carried out by all the States except Tasmania. 

Assistance is granted towards the payment of passage money to persons 
desiring to settle on the land or to engage in farm or dairy work, to domestic 
servants and to other persons who can satisfy the Agents-General that they 
will make suitable settlers ; while persons resident in Australia may nominate 
their relatives or friends to come out by assisted passages. 

During 1913, assistance was granted to 39,796 immigrants, making the 
total number assisted from the earliest times, 812,491. 

6. The Postal Service. 

The development of a postal service in a large and sparsely populated 
territory is necessarily a work of difficulty and expense. In its comparatively 
short history, Australia has inaugurated a postal service which reaches 
practically every inhabited part of the continent, although its population 
is only about one-twentieth that of the United States of America, while its 
area is the same. 

The first office for postal purposes was established in Sydney in 1809, 
the charge for the delivery of each letter being one shilling ; but it was not 
until 1828 that a system of general post office communication was inaugur- 
ated. Kates of postage depended entirely upon the distance and difficulty 
of transmission, and varied from three pence to a shilling per letter. 

In Tasmania, the mails in 1824 were delivered once a fortnight by foot 
post, while in 1835 a mail cart made the journey twice a week from Hobart 
to Launceston (121 miles) in nineteen hours. A post office was established 
in Melbourne in 1837, with a fortnightly service between that city and 
Sydney. It is interesting at the present to notice a clause in the Postal 
Amendment Act passed in 1840 in New South Wales, which made it com- 
pulsory, under a penalty of from £10 to £50, for the masters of all vessels 
entering a port " to give timely notice of the near approach thereof, either 
by the ringing of a bell or by such other signal as may reasonably be expected 
to be distinctly heard or seen by the postmaster, a sufficient time before the 
actual arrival of such steam-boat or other vessel to enable hina to receive 
or despatch any mail on board." 



596 



Federal Handbook. 



In the year 1841, there were only 102 post offices in Australia, 56 being 
in New South Wales, 43 in Tasmania, and 3 in what is now Victoria. 

Subsequent to the discovery of gold, the history of the postal services 
reveals a remarkable rate of increase in postal correspondence, as is seen 
from the following table : — 

Development op Postal Services. 



Particulars. 


1861. 


1881. 


1901. 


1912. 


Number of post offices 


1,006 


3,018 


5,008 


8,225 


Number of letters and post 










cards dealt with. .. 


12,844,000 


67,640,000 


220,177,000 


479,673,000 


Number per post office 


12,700 


22,400 


43,900 


58,300 


Number of letters and post- 










cards dealt with per 100 










of population . . 


1,099 


2,932 


5,756 


10,134 



7. Scientific Societies and Liberal Educational Effort. 

Despite the adverse influences incidental to the development of a young 
country, higher education and the promotion of scientific efEort were not 
neglected even in the earliest days of Australia, as the history of the 
establishment of scientific societies, superior schools, and the universities 
abimdantly shews. To some of these we shall now refer. 

The origin of the Royal Society of New South Wales dates as far back as 
1821, when, under the name of the Philosophical Society of Australasia, it was 
founded by Sir Thomas Brisbane, who was its first president. Its present title 
was acquired by Royal sanction in 1866, its object being the promotion of art, 
science, literature, and philosophy. Some of the papers of the old Philosophical 
Society published in 1825 contain much that is interesting of the early history 
of Australia. The society has now over 300 members, while its exchange list 
comprises the names of 370 kindred societies. The society possesses a very fine 
library of about 21,000 volumes and pamphlets, and issues annually a journal 
of 500-600 pp., the 47th volume of which has already appeared. 

The Royal Society of Victoria dates back to 1854, the year preceding 
that during which its constituent origins, viz., the Victorian Institute for the 
Advancement of Science and the Philosophical Society of Victoria, were 
amalgamated, under the title of the Philosophical Institute of Victoria. Its 
present title was received in 1860. The constitution of the society states 
that it was founded " for the promotion of art, literature, and science," but 
for many years past science has monopolized its energies. Up to the present 
56 volumes of publications have been issued. The society has a fine library 
of 10,000 volumes, and exchanges with 326 kindred bodies. 

The Royal Society of Queensland was instituted in 1884, being formed 
" for the furtherance of the natural and applied sciences, especially by means of 
original research." At latest date the members numbered over 100 ; publica- 
tions, 75 volumes ; library, 4,000 volumes ; and societies on exchange list, 142. 
The present Royal Society of South Australia grew out of the Adelaide 
Philosophical Society, which was founded in 1853, its object being the dis- 
cussion of all subjects connected with science, literature, and art. Despite this 
programme, the tendency ;of the society became purely scientific. Permission 



Australia : Its People and Their Activities. 



597 



to assume the title " Eoyal " was obtained in 1879, the society thenceforward 
being known as the Royal Society of South Australia. The membership is now 
about 100, and the exchange list numbers 253. Up to the present the society 
has issued 36 volumes of proceedings, and six of memoirs, exclusive of 
individual papers pubUshed in earlier years. 

The Royal Society of Tasmania, the first " Royal Society " to be estab- 
lished outside the United Kingdom, was founded in 1843, and in the list of the 
first corresponding members appear the names of Captains Ross and Crozier, 
of H.M.S. Erebus and Terror. The society has a membership of nearly 200, 
and a library of 8,000 volumes. Aimual volumes of proceedings have been 
published since 1844, and exchanges are made with 140 kindred bodies. 

The Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science was founded 
in 1888, and has its head-quarters in Sydney. It meets biennially in each State 
in turn. Up to date, thirteen volumes of proceedings have been issued, and 
the exchange list numbers 250. The Linnean Society of New South Wales, 
founded in 1875, maintains three investigators engaged in research work. 

The principal scientific society in Western Australia, viz., the Natural 
History and Science Society of Western Australia, has grown out of the 
Mueller Botanic Society, founded in 1897, and has for its object the study 
of natural history and pure science, promoted by periodical meetings and field 
excursions. Its membership is 118, and since its establishment twenty 
journals of proceedings have been issued. 

There are a number of lesser societies, among which may be mentioned 
the British Astronomical Society, which has a branch in Sydney, and the 
Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, which has branches in Melbourne, 
Brisbane, and Adelaide, while Melbourne is the head-quarters of the 
Royal Australasian Ornithological Union. In 1901 the Australian Historical 
Society was founded in Sydney, having for its object the collection and 
preservation of all books, records, relics, and cognate matters having reference 
to Australian history. 

There are also professional societies, among which may be mentioned the 
Sydney, Melbourne, and Brisbane branches of the British Medical Associa- 
tion; and the Institutions of Surveyors of New South Wales and Victoria. 

As far as can be ascertained, the total number of libraries in the 
Commonwealth at the latest available date was about 1,500, the number 
of books contained therein being estimated at nearly 3,000,000. In 
each of the capital cities there is a well-equipped public library, the 
institutions in Sydney and Melbourne, especially, comparing very favorably 
with similar institutions in other parts of the world. An interesting table, 
shewing the number of libraries in receipt of State or municipal aid, is given 
hereunder : — 

Subsidized Libraries and Books Therein. 



Particulars. N.S.W. 


Vic. 


Q'land 


8. Aust. 


W. Aust. 


Tas. 


Northprn 
Territory. 


Number of libraries 477 
Estimated number 1 

of books . . 925,000 


525 
1,109,000 


203 
304,000 


211 
459,000 


237 
214,000 


32 2 
106,000 2,700 



598 Federal Handbook. 



Amongst other important libraries not included in the above table may be 
enumerated those at the Sydney University and the Australian Museum, 
which contain 96,000 and 18,000 volumes respectively. There are also over 
500 libraries, with an estimated total of 145,000 volumes, attached to the State 
schools. In each of the capital cities, and in Launceston, museums devoted 
to natural history, ethnology, and geology have been established. The 
Australian Museum in Sydney, founded in 1836, is the oldest institution 
of its kind in Australia, and contains, inter alia, a very valuable and complete 
set of specimens of Australian fauna. There is a fine Technological Museum 
in Sydney, with branches in six country centres, the metropolitan institution 
containing over 109,000 specimens. Valuable research work in connexion 
with the oil and other products of the eucalyptus has been undertaken by 
the scientific stafi. A similar institution in Melbourne contains upwards 
of 55,000 specimens. Museums devoted to botany and plant life are estab- 
lished in Sydney, Melbourne, and Hobart ; while there are several museums 
devoted to special objects, such as the " Nicholson " Museum of Antiquities 
in Sydney, and the Queensland Geological Survey Museum in Brisbane and 
Townsville. Each of the capital cities, as well as many of the larger towns, 
have erected art galleries, containing many valuable works by both European 
and Australian artists. 

8. Educational Benefactions. 

The Universities of Australia have benefited considerably by private 
munificence, and so also have other institutions of an educational character, 
such as Public Art Galleries, Technical Schools, Museums and Libraries, etc. 

The most notable public benefactions are those which the Sydney 
University has enjoyed, donations thereto aggregating nearly £500,000, of 
which the bequests of Mr. J. H. Challis (£250,000), Sir P. N. Russell 
(£100,000), and Mr. Thomas Fisher (£20,000) are the most noteworthy. 

Melbourne University has received private benefactions totalling £175,000, 
Sir Samuel Wilson (£30,000), Mr. James Stewart (£25,000), and the Hon. 
Francis Ormond (£20,000) being the largest contributors. The last-named 
gentleman also donated £108,000 to Ormond College, one of the affiliated 
colleges of the Melbourne University. 

Sir Thomas Elder and Sir W. Hughes, with sums of £98,000 and £20,000 
respectively, are the chief benefactors of the Adelaide University, which has 
so far received bequests totalling about £154,000. 

Other notable benefactions are the collections of Sir Charles Nicholson 
and Mr. George Masters to the Sydney University, the building for the 
Natural History Museum given by Sir W. Macleay, the library of IVIr. D. S. 
Mitchell, M.A. (valued at £108,000), given to the City of Sydney, and 
the Felton Bequest given to the Melbourne Art Gallery, and which returns 
annually about £8,000 to the trustees of that institution. 



y> 



By Authority : Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne. 

